14-00000
104-10333-10011
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
AGENCY INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
OGC-94-52916
19 September 1994
MEMORANDUM FOR:
David P. Holmes
Deputy General Counsel
FROM:
Robert J. Eatinger. Jr.
Assistant General Counsel
Litigation Division, OGC
SUBJECT:
DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect
to JFK Assassination Records
1. Per your request, I have attached a copy of the
President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992 (ARCA), Pub. L. 102-526, 106 Stat. 3443-3458, reprinted at
44 U.S.C. § 2107 note. For your convenience, I have highlighted
the pertinent provisions that will aid in responding to an
inquiry regarding the statute's effect on the DCI's statutory
authority to protect intelligence sources and methods.
2. The clear language and intent of the law is to supersede
statutes that prohibit disclosure of information, except for some
irrelevant subject areas, such as tax records. The statute
provides that "it shall take precedence over any other law
(except section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code), judicial
decision construing such law, or common law doctrine that would
otherwise prohibit" the disclosure of information subject to the
Act. ARCA § 11(a). This language, taken with the provisions
discussed below which limit the intelligence sources and methods
that may be protected and set a strict procedural scheme by which
information is to be reviewed under the ARCA, effectively
supersedes the DCI's National Security Act authority with respect
to intelligence sources and methods information subject to the
ARCA.
3. Section 6 of the ARCA provides the grounds for which the
release of information may be "postponed." The statute
contemplates that all information will eventually be released.
Indeed, it specifies that all information will be made available
to the public no later than 25 years after the passage of the
ARCA (which occurred in October 1992) unless the president
certifies that continued postponement is necessary. ARCA
§ 4(g) (2) (D). With respect to intelligence-related information,
ARCA_allows postponement if:
"(1) the threat to
...
intelligence operations
...
is
of such gravity that it outweighs the public interest, and
such public disclosure would reveal-.
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
AGENCY INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
SUBJECT: DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect to JFK
Assassination Records
(A) an intelligence agent whose identity currently
requires protection;
(B) an intelligence source or method which is
currently utilized, or reasonably expected to be
utilized, by the United States Government and which has
not been officially disclosed, the disclosure of which
would interfere with the conduct of intelligence
activities; or
...
...
(C) any other matter currently relating to
intelligence operations the disclosure of which
would demonstrably impair the national security of the
United States."
ARCA § 6(1) (Emphasis added.)
4. The originating agency is to make the first review to
identify information that meets the standards for postponement.
ARCA § 4(c)(2)(D)(i). For CIA, this effort is being undertaken
by the Historical Review Group, in consultation with the
Directorate of Operations and other appropriate Agency
components. Information the originating agencies identify for
postponement must be transmitted to the Review Board. ARCA
§ 4(c)(2)(Ε). The Review Board "shall consider and render
decisions on a determination by a Government office to seek to
postpone the disclosure of assassination records." ARCA §
7(1)(1). Specifically, the "Review Board sha'l consider and
render decisions on whether an assassination record or
particular information in a record qualifies for postponement of
disclosure under the Act." ARCA § 7(1)(2)(B).
5. If the Review Board determines to order the disclosure
of information that the originating agency feit met the criteria
for postponement, it "shall notify the head of the originating
body of its determination and publish a copy of the determination
in the Federal Register within 14 days after the determination is
made." ARCA § 9(c)(4)(A). If the information contained in an
assassination record is "obtained or developed solely within the
executive branch, the President shall have the sole and
nondelegable authority to require the disclosure or postponement
of ... the information under the standards set forth in
Section 6." ARCA § 9(d)(1) (emphasis added). The President's
decision must be certified to the Review Board within 30 days of
the Review Boards determination. Id. Records postponed by the
President must be re-reviewed every 5 years. ARCA § 9 (d)(2).
2
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
SUBJECT: DCI Sources and Methods Authority With Respect to JFK
Assassination Records
6. I would be happy to discuss this further if you so
desire. You might also want to contact John Pereira (x30373)
since he has met with some or all of the Review Board members.
Attachment
Robert J. Eatinger, Jr.
3
PRIVILEGED ATTORNEY WORK PRODUCT
AGENCY-INTERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
SUBJECT: DCI Sources and Methods Authority w/Respect
to JFK Assassination Records
OGC-94-52916
DCI/OGC/RJEatinger:76105 (19 Sept 94)
Original
Addressee
w/attach) (hand delivered)
1 OGC Registry (w/attach.)
1 Lit File
1 RBB (OGC/ILD)
1 C/HRG (J.Pereira-404 Ames)
1 RJE Soft File (w/attach)
1 RJE Signer
1 PDP
1 KK-fyi
1 PAS-fyi
14-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
DRAFT
CHAPTER XIV -- ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
Part 1400-GUIDANCE FOR INTERPRETATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS
COLLECTION ACT OF 1992" (ARCA)
Sec.
1400.1 Scope of assassination record.
1400.2 Scope of additional records and information.
1400.3 Sources of assassination records and additional records and
information.
17
14-00000
DRAFT
1400.4 Types of materials included in scope of assassination record and
additional records and information.
1400.5 Requirement that assassination records be released in their entirety.
1400.6 Originals and copies.
1400.7 Additional guidance.
1400.8 Implementing the ARCA - Notice of Assassination Record Designation.
Authority: 44 U.S.C. 2107 note.
§ 1400.1
Scope of assassination record,
(a) An assassination record includes, but is not limited to, all records,
public and private, regardless of how labeled or identified, that document,
describe, report on, analyze, or interpret activities, persons, or events reasonably
related to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy and investigations of or
inquiries into the assassination.
(b) An assassination record further includes, without limitation:
(1) All records as defined in Sec. 3(2) of the ARCA;
(2) All records collected by or segregated by all federal, state, and local
government agencies in conjunction with any investigation or analysis of or
inquiry into the assassination of President Kennedy (for example, any intra-
agency investigation or analysis of or inquiry into the assassination; any inter-
agency communication regarding the assassination; any request by the House
Select Committee on Assassinations to collect documents and other materials; or
18
14-00000
DRAFT
any inter- or intra-agency collection or segregation of documents and other
materials);
(3) Other records or groups of records listed in the Notice of
Assassination Record Designation, as described in §1400.8 of this chapter.
§1400.2 Scope of additional records and information.
The term additional records and information includes:
(a) All documents used by government offices and agencies during their
declassification review of assassination records as well as all other documents,
indices, and other material (including but not limited to those that disclose
cryptonyms, code names, or other identifiers that appear in assassination
records) that the Assassination Records Review Board has a reasonable basis to
believe may constitute an assassination record or would assist in the
identification, evaluation or interpretation of an assassination record. The
Assassination Records Review Board will identify in writing those records and
other materials it intends to seek under this section.
(b) All training manuals, instructional materials, and guidelines created or
used by the agencies in furtherance of their review of assassination records.
(c) All records, lists, and documents describing the procedure by which the
agencies identified or selected assassination records for review.
(d) Organizational charts of government agencies.
(e) Records necessary and sufficient to describe the agency's:
19
14-00000
DRAFT
(1) Records policies and schedules;
(2) Filing systems and organization;
(3) Storage facilities and locations;
(4) Indexing symbols, marks, codes, instructions, guidelines, methods and
procedures;
(5) Search methods and procedures used in the performance of the agencies'
duties under the ARCA; and
(6) Reclassification to a higher level, transfer, destruction, or other
information (e.g., theft) regarding the status of assassination records.
(f) Any other record that does not fall within the scope of assassination
record as described in §1400.1, but which has the potential to enhance, enrich,
and broaden the historical record of the assassination.
§1400.3 Sources of assassination records and additional records and
information.
Assassination records and additional records and information may be located at,
or under the control of, without limitation:
(a) Agencies, offices, and entities of the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of the federal government;
(b) Agencies, offices, and entities of the executive, legislative, and judicial
branches of state and local governments;
20
14-00000
DRAFT
(c) Record repositories and archives of federal, state, and local governments,
including presidential libraries;
(d) Record repositories and archives of universities, libraries, historical
societies, and other similar organizations;
(e) Individuals who possess such records by virtue of service with a
government agency, office, or entity;
(f) Persons, including individuals and corporations, who have obtained such
records from sources identified in subparagraphs (a) through (e) of this section;
(g) Persons, including individuals or corporations, who have themselves
created or have obtained such records from sources other than those identified in
subparagraphs (a) through (e) of this section;
(h) Federal, state, and local courts where such records are being held under
seal; or
(i) Foreign governments.
§1400.4 Types of materials included in scope of assassination record and
additional records and information.
The term record in assassination record and additional records and information
includes, for purposes of interpreting and implementing the ARCA:
(a) papers, maps, and other documentary material;
(b) photographs;
(c) motion pictures;
21
14-00000
DRAFT
(d) sound and video recordings;
(e) machine readable information in any form; and
(f) artifacts.
§1400.5
Requirement that assassination records be released in their entirety.
An assassination record shall be disclosed in its entirety except for
portions specifically postponed pursuant to the grounds for postponement of
public disclosure of records established in Sec. 6 of the ARCA, and no portion of
any assassination record shall be withheld from public disclosure solely on
grounds of non-relevance unless, in the Assassination Records Review Board's
sole discretion, release of part of a record is sufficient to comply with the intent
and purposes of the ARCA.
§1400.6
Originals and copies.
(a) For purposes of determining whether originals or copies of assassination
records will be made part of the President John F. Kennedy Assassination
Records Collection (the JFK Assassination Records Collection) established under
the ARCA, the following shall apply:
(1) In the case of papers, maps, and other documentary materials, the
Assassination Records Review Board may determine that record copies of
Government records, either the signed original, original production or a
reproduction that has been treated as the official record maintained to chronicle
22
14-00000
DRAFT
government functions or activities, may be placed in the JFK Assassination
Records Collection;
(2) In the case of other papers, maps, and other documentary material, the
Assassination Records Review Board may determine that a true and accurate
copy in lieu of the original may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection;
(3) In the case of photographs, the original negative, whenever
available (otherwise, the earliest generation print that is a true and accurate
copy) may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(4) In the case of motion pictures, the camera original, whenever
available (otherwise, the earliest generation print that is a true and accurate
copy), may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(5) In the case of sound and video recordings, the original recording,
whenever available (otherwise, the earliest generation copy that is a true and
accurate copy), may be placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection;
(6) In the case of machine-readable information, a true and accurate
copy of the original (duplicating all information contained in the original and in
a format that permits retrieval of the information) may be placed in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection; and
(7) In the case of artifacts, the original objects themselves may be
placed in the JFK Assassination Records Collection.
23
14-00000
DRAFT
(b) To the extent records from foreign governments are included in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, copies of the original records shall be sufficient
for inclusion in the collection.
(c) In cases where a copy, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section above, is
authorized by the Assassination Records Review Board to be included in the JFK
Assassination Records Collection, the Assassination Records Review Board may,
at its discretion if it determines it to be necessary to ensure the integrity of the
JFK Assassination Records Collection, require a certified copy. In cases where an
original, as defined in paragraph (a) of this section, is required for inclusion in
the JFK Assassination Records Collection the Assassination Records Review
Board may, at its discretion, accept the best available copy. In such cases that
records included in the collection, whether originals or copies, contain illegible
portions, such records shall have attached thereto a certified transcription of the
illegible language to the extent practicable.
(d) For purposes of implementing the ARCA, the term copy means a true and
accurate photocopy duplication by a means appropriate to the medium of the
original record that preserves and displays the integrity of the record and the
information contained in it.
(e) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to suggest that additional
copies of any assassination records contained in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection are not also assassination records that, at the Assassination Records
24
14-00000
DRAFT
Review Board's discretion, may also be placed in the JFK Assassination Records
Collection.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent or preclude copies
of any assassination records, and particularly assassination records in
audiovisual or machine readable formats, from being made from time to time in
the professional judgment of and at the discretion of the National Archives and
Records Administration for purposes of preservation or reformatting to conform
to different hardware and/or software requirements.
§1400.7
(a) A government agency, office, or entity includes, for purposes of
interpreting and implementing the ARCA, all current, past, and former
departments, agencies, offices, divisions, foreign offices, bureaus, and
deliberative bodies of any federal, state, or local government and includes all
inter- or intra-agency working groups, committees, and meetings that possess or
created records relating to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
(b) The inclusion of artifacts in the scope of the term assassination
record is understood to apply solely for purposes of establishing the JFK
Assassination Records Collection and for fully implementing the terms of the
ARCA and has no direct or indirect bearing on the interpretation or
implementation of any other statute or regulation.
In the case of artifacts deemed to be assassination records and included in
25
Additional guidance.
14-00000
DRAFT
the JFK Assassination Records Collection, the provision to the public of
photographs, drawings, or similar materials depicting the artifacts shall be
sufficient to comply with the ARCA's requirement that copies of assassination
records be provided to the public upon request. Additional display of or
examination by the public of artifacts in the JFK Assassination Records Collection
shall occur under the terms and conditions established by the National Archives
and Records Administration to ensure their preservation and protection for
posterity.
(d) The terms and, or, any, all, and the plural and singular forms of nouns
shall be understood in their broadest and most inclusive sense and shall not be
understood to be terms of limitation.
(e) Unless the Assassination Records Review Board in its sole discretion
directs otherwise, records that are identified with respect to a particular person
shall include all records relating to that person that use or reflect their true name
or any other name, pseudonym, codeword, symbol, number, cryptonym or alias
used to identify that person.
(f) Unless the Assassination Records Review Board in its sole discretion
directs otherwise, records that are identified by the Assassination Records
Review Board with respect to a particular operation or program shall include all
records pertaining to that program by any other name, pseudonym, codeword,
symbol, number or cryptonym.
26
14-00000
DRAFT
§1400.8 Implementing the ARCA -- Notice of Assassination Record
Designation.
(a) A Notice of Assassination Record Designation shall be the mechanism for
the Assassination Records Review Board to announce publicly its determination
that a record or group of records meets the definition of assassination records.
(b) Notice of all designations will be published in the Federal Register within
30 days of the decision to designate such records as assassination records.
In determining that a record or group of records meets the definition of
assassination records, the Assassination Records Review Board must determine
that the record or group of records will more likely than not enhance, enrich, and
broaden the historical record of the assassination.
14-00000
102D CONGRESS
2d Session
}
SENATE
Calendar No. 552
{
REPORT
102-328
THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
RECORDS COLLECTION ACT OF 1992
REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
TO ACCOMPANY
S. 3006
TO PROVIDE FOR THE EXPEDITIOUS DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS
RELEVANT TO THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F.
KENNEDY
★59-010
JULY 22 (legislative day, JULY 20), 1992. Ordered to be printed
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON: 1992
S.Rept. 102-328 Ο 92
1
14-00000
21
tion, it is important to emphasize and clarify the legislative intent
and importance of particular provisions of the Act.
Defining assassination records
"Assassination records" are defined in Section 3. The definition
of "assassination records" is a threshold consideration for the suc-
cessful implementation of the Act. Its scope will be the barometer
of public confidence in the release of assassination records. While
the records of past presidential commissions and congressional
committees established to investigate the assassination of President
Kennedy are included as assassination records under this Act, it is
intended and emphasized that the search and disclosure of records
under this Act must go beyond those records. While such records
are valuable, they reflect the views, theories, political constraints,
and prejudices of past inquiries. Proper implementation of this Act
and providing the American public with the opportunity to judge
the surrounding history of the assassination for themselves, re-
quires including not only, but going beyond, the records of the
Warren and Rockefeller Commissions, and the Church and House
Select Assassination Committees.
The term "assassination record" was not more specifically de-
fined by the Committee because to do so before more is known
about the universe of records would have been premature, and
would have further injected the government between the records
and the American public. There is a sufficient volume of known as-
sassination records to organize and review at the outset. However,
it is intended that the Review Board issue guidance to assist in ar-
ticulating the scope or universe of assassination records as govern-
ment offices and the Review Board undertakes their responsibil-
ities. Such guidance will be valuable notwithstanding the fact that
government offices will begin to organize and review their records
before the Review Board is established. Government offices are re-
quired to begin the review and disclosure of records upon enact-
ment to expedite public access to the many records which do not
require additional review or postponement. However, the ultimate
work of the Review Board will involve not only the review of
records recommended for postponement, but requiring government
offices to provide additional information and records, where appro-
priate. Guidance, especially that developed in consultation with the
public, scholars, and affected government offices, will prove valua-
ble to ensure the fullest possible disclosure and create public confi-
dence in a working definition that was developed in an independ-
ent and open manner.
Autopsy Records
The Act specifically excludes from the definition of "assassi-
nation records" the autopsy records and copies or reproductions
made from such records donated by the Kennedy family pursuant
to a deed of gift executed on October 29, 1966. These records in-
clude the autopsy photographs and X-rays of President Kennedy.
The Committee believes that this exclusion is a sound policy. The
Committee believes that there is a compelling justification for pro-
tecting the privacy of the Kennedy family from the unwarranted
14-00000
19
the date of enactment unless, in the case of executive branch
records, the President demonstrates that public disclosure will
result in an identifiable harm to the national security, intelligence
operations, or foreign relations of the United States.
The Assassination Records Review Board is an independent
agency within the executive branch. The five-member Review
Board will be appointed by the President with the advice and con-
sent of the United States Senate. The confirmation hearings will be
conducted by the Committee on Governmental Affairs. The Act re-
quires that the Review Board include at least one historian and
one attorney, and that each member is a national recognized pro-
fessional in his or her field. The legislation requires that prior to
making the appointments, the President is required to consider rec-
ommendations from the American Historical Association, the Orga-
nization of American Historians, the Society of American Archi-
vists, and the American Bar Association.
To ensure a comprehensive search and disclosure of assassination
records, particularly to enable the public to obtain information and
records beyond the scope of previous official inquiries, the Review
Board has the authority to direct any government office to produce
additional information and records which it believes are related to
the assassination. It has the authority to subpoena private persons
and to enforce the subpoenas through the courts.
The Review Board is authorized for a two-year period and it may
be extended by a majority vote of the Review Board for up to an
additional year. The Review Board-could decide to extend it exist-
ence to less than one year if that is the time determined as neces-
sary to complete its work. Annual financial reports and other peri-
odic reports are required to be provided to the Congress. The re-
ports must include statements of progress, the level of cooperation
of government offices and agencies, and the possible need for addi-
tional time or authority from Congress.
IV. BACKGROUND AND NEED FOR LEGISLATION
On November 22, 1963, President John F. Kennedy was assassi-
nated. It was a tragic and defining moment in American history.
The desire by the American public to understand who assassinated
President Kennedy, and why, has resulted in several official inves-
tigations and a broad spectrum of private inquiries and scholar-
ship. Unfortunately, in the eyes of the public, each investigation
and inquiry served to raise additional questions, and did so while
increasing the volume of secret government records about the as-
sassination. In 1992, the public demand, fostered by increased
media attention, the opening of secret files by changing govern-
ments around the world, and other factors, culminated in the rec-
ognition by the Congress and the Executive Branch that the
records related to the assassination of President Kennedy should be
fully disclosed.
In addition to the legislation considered by the Committee, and
its counterpart considered by the House Committee on Government
Operations, four other related, though more limited, measures
were introduced in the House of Representatives in 1992. Two bills
mandating the release of all Kennedy assassination investigation
14-00000
7506
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 26 / Wednesday, February 8, 1995 / Proposed Rules
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
above, $25; and,
$25.
(C) For retirees and their dependents.
(vi) The copayment for prescription
drugs per prescription, for a maximum
30-day supply. is as follows:
(A) For dependents of active duty
mombors in pay grades E-1 through E-
4,$5;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
above, $5; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$9.
(vii) The copayment for ambulanco
services is as follows:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-1 through.
E-4. $10;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-S and
above, $15; and,
$20..
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
(e) Inpatient cost sharing
requirements under the Uniform HMO
Benefit (1) In general. In lieu of usual
CHAMPUS cost sharing requirements
(see § 194.4(1)), special cost sharing
amounts are required. The specific
requirements shall be uniform and shall
be published as a notice annually by the
Assistant Secretary of Defense (Health
Affairs)
(2) Structure of cost sharing. For
servicos other than mental illness or
substance use treatment, there is a
nominal copayment for active duty
dependents and for retired members.
dependents of retired members, and
survivors. For inpatient mental health
and substance use treatment, a separate
per day charge is established.
(3) Amount of inpatient cost sharing
requirements. Beginning in fiscal year
1995, the inpatient cost sharing
requirements are as follows:
(i) For acute care admissions and
other non-mental health/substance use
treatment admissions, the per diem
charge is as follows, with a minimum
charge of $25 per admission:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades E-1 through E-
4,$11;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-5 and
above, $11; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents.
$11.
(ii) For mental health/substanco use
treatment admissions, and for partial
hospitalization services, the per diem
charge is as follows, with a minimum
charge of $25 per admission:
(A) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades E-1 through E-
4. $20;
(B) For dependents of active duty
members in pay grades of E-S and
above, $20; and,
(C) For retirees and their dependents,
$40.
(1) Updates. The enrollment fees for
fiscal year 1995 set under paragraph (c)
of this section and the per services
specific dollar amounts for fiscal year
1995 set under paragraphs (d) and (e) of
this section may be updated for
subsequent years to the extent necessary.
to maintain compliance with statutory
requirements pertaining to government
costs. This updating does not apply to
cost sharing that is expressed as a
porcentage of allowable charges; these
percentages will remain unchanged.
(g) Applicability of the Uniform HMO
Benefit to Uniformed Services
Treatment Facilities Managed Care
Program. The provisions of this section
concerning the Uniform HMO Benefit
shall apply to the Uniformed Sørvices
Treatment Facilities Managed Care
Program, effective October 1, 1995.
Under that program, non-CHAMPUS
eligible beneficiaries have the same
payment responsibilities as CHAMPUS
eligible beneficiaries.
Dated. February 2, 1995.
LM. Bynum,
Alternate OSD Federal Hexister Liaison
Officer, Department of Defense.
[FR Doc. 95-3028 Filod 2-7-95.8 45 aral
BILLING CODE 6000-04-44
ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW
BOARD
36 CFR Part 1400
Guidance on Interpreting and
Implementing the President John F.
Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992
AGENCY: Assassination Records Review
Board (ARRB).
ACTION: Proposed interpretive
regulation.
SUMMARY: The ARRB proposes to issue
regulations providing guidance on the
interpretation of certain terms defined
in and the implementation of the
President John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992.
DATES: To be considered, comments
between the hours of 9:30 am. and 4:30
p.m., Monday through Friday (except
legal holidays). Comments may also be
faxed to the Board at (202) 724-0457.
Comments received may be inspected in
the Board's public reading room, located
at the address shown above, between 10
a.m. and 3 p.m. Monday through Friday
(except legal holidays). Parsons wishing
to inspect comments in the Board's
public reading room should call the
Board's office beforehand at (202) 724-
0088 for further information.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
Sheryl L. Walter (General Counsel).
(202) 724-0088.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background
The President John F. Konnedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992, 44 U.S.C. 2107 note (as amended)
(ARCA), established the President John
F. Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection (the JFK Collection) at the
National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA). In establishing
the process for public disclosure of all
records relating to the assassination,
Congress created an independent agency
within the executive branch, the
Assassination Records Review Board
(the Board), which consists of five
citizens appointed by the President.
Under the statute, the Board is
empowered to dende "whether a record
constitutes an assassination record." 44
U.S C. 2107 note, Sec. 7(1)(2)(A).
Congress further made clear its intent
that the Board "issue guidance to assist
in articulating the scope or universe of
assassination records." President John
F. Kennedy Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992, S.Rep. 102-328.
102d Cong.. 2d Sess. (1992) at 21.
In constructing the proposed guidance
set out here, the Board seeks to
Implement congressional intent that the
JFK Collection contain "the most
comprehensive disclosure of records
related to the assassination of President
Kennedy." Id. at 18. The Board is also
mindful of Congress's instruction that
the Board apply a "broad and
encompassing" working definition of
"assassination record" in order to
achieve the goal of assembling the
fullest historical record on this tragic
event in American history and on the
investigations that were undertaken in.
the assassination's aftermath. The Board
must be received on or before March 10, recognizes that many agencies have
1995.
ADDRESSES: Comments should be
mailed to the Assassination Records
Review Board at 600 E Street, NW,
Second floor, Washington, D.C. 20530 or
delivered in person to that address
already begun to organize and review
records responsive to the ARCA even
before the Board was appointed and
began its work. Nevertheless, the
Board's aim is that this guidance will
ald in the ultimate assembly and public
14-00000
7507
Federal Register / Vol. 60, No. 26 / Wednesday, February 8, 1995 / Proposed Rules
assassination records as well as all other
documents, indices; records, and other
material that disclose cryptonyms, code
names, or other identification material
in assassination records.
(b) All training manuals, instructional
materials, and guidelines created or
used by the agencies in furthorance of
their roview of assassination records.
(c) All records, lists, and documents
describing the procedure by which the
agencies identified or sclected
assassination records for review.
(d) Organizational charts of
government agencies.
1400.4 Types of materials included in scope describe the agency's:
(e) Records necessary and sufficient to
of assassination record and additional
records and information.
records be released in their entirely
President Kennedy's assassination. Id. at 1400.5 Requirement that assassination
21. The Board also soeks to provide
notice of the scope of its intended
exercise of authority to seek additional
information or records in order to fulfill
its functions and responsibilitios under
the ARCA.
In addition, the Board proposes to
create a mochanism to facilitate the
Board's ongoing work and to further
ensure future public access to the
broadest possible historical record. This
mechanism will be known as the
"Catalog of Assassination Records"
(COAR). The COAR is intended to be an
official listing of all records determined
by the Board to meet the definition of
"assassination record" and included in
the JFK Collection.
Request for Comments
The Board seeks public comment on
its proposed interpretive regulations
intended to provide guidance on the
Intorpretation of the term assassination
record, the intended scope of its
exercise of authority to seek additional
Information or records, and its
additional proposals for implemontation
of the ARCA.
List of Subjects in 36 CFR Part 1400
Administrative practice and
procedure, Archives and records.
Accordingly, the Assassination
Records Review Board hereby proposes
to establish a new chapter XIV in title
36 of the Code of Federal Regulations to
ruad as follows:
(1) Records policies and schedules:
(2) Filing systems and organization:
and
(3) Storage facilitios and locations.
1400.6 Originals and copies.
1400