14-00000
104-10163-10041
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
30 June 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
BUBJECT: Telephone Conversation between AMBIDDY-1 and
Martin Ferrer
DATE : 30 June at 1100 hours
1. Upon Erneido Oliva's request, AMBIDDY-1 went to
meet with him last night. At the meeting Oliva mentioned
to A-1 that he (Oliva) was receiving the backing of KUBARK
and the Pentagon and implied A-l was also receiving aid.
Oliva stated that he has met with Alfredo Rodemeyer, the same
Rodemeyer that both of them had met early last year. A-1
replied this was all before the death of Kennedy and he
no longer had contact with any of ODYOKE's officials.
According to Oliva, Mr. Rodemeyer spoke badly of some of the
personnel in A-l's organization, e.g., Antonio Iglesias, i
Oliva mentioned that he had talked with Thomas Mann
recently and expected to seu Mr. Mann within the coming week
to receive support for his conventional warfare program.
A-1 told Oliva he had no objection to the conventional
warfare plan and that he would morally support Oliva in
liberating Cuba. However, he would continue in his own
little way with his unconventional war. According to A-1,
he made it clear to Oliva that he was not receiving ODYOKE
backing.
2. A-1 expects to leave on 1 July for Costa Pica
tomorrow. He again mentioned that Adelaide will soon be
leaving the United States. A-1 commented he does not expect
to visit the United States as often as he has done in the
past. A-1 asked that Enrique and Mr. Archer clearly under-
stand that he does intend to keep his word concerning the
changes he has mentioned to us at the last two meetings.
Above conversation conducted (
ts prearranged frequently
shanged privacy code
Recluded from automatis
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
3. A-1 expressed a desire to meet with Mr. Archer
sontime after the August operations.
Raul J. Hende
Raul J. Hernandez
WH/SA/SO/HH
Filo:
AMBIDDY-1-201
Conversations
Oliva 201
convertalen eendusted
prearranged frequently
ged privacy sede
SECRET
Ereludes from wat
14-00000
29 June 1964
ANNORLD'S MEETING IN NEW ORLEANS, 24 June 1964
SUBJECT: ANBIDDY-1's Image and Philosophy
1. ANBIDDY-1's preoccupation with his political image
shene thru, shen he inquired whether we suspected him of
dictatorial leanings. We replied, in effect, that we enter-
Rained such suspicions and inclined toward taking his proteste-
tions of liberalion and laisses faire with a heavy dose of
salt. Once in power, he would treat the 1940 as a scrap of
paper and run the country along autoritorian lines. Flattered
by his implied inclusion in the line of succession, A-l only
voiced mild dissent.
2. Comments Considering the exigencies of autemony
which dany us much opportunity, let alone leverage in shaping
ANGIDOT-1's political philosophy, we have conveyed to him to a
variety of ways that we do not particularly care one way or
the other, that we do not fancy him as a chosen instrument outside
the periphery of AORLD and that by extension - we have no
intention of promoting any political aspirations he may barbor.
We have also left no doubt in his mind that we view his per-
fernance in the ANWORLD driver's seat rather than any philose-
phical streams of consciousness, as a dupendable gauge of how
he would be performing in a position of political responsibility.
Vo pointed out to ANTIDDY-1 that Liberation Day would
find a prestrats, bankrupt and exhausted people, weary to death
ef politics and propaganda, exaving to be left alons for a stále
te eelises its thoughts. There would be ne political infra-
structure on which to build and promaturely called general elections
'vould merely serve to deluce the currency of parliamentary dome
eracy even more. For a voile at least, a benign and just exscutibil
vould have to restora Cuba's equilibriua and permit her te rebuild
the feat ratione without which a descracy commot properly function.
SECRET
14-00000
SECT
-2-
In this contaxt, we mentioned sentiments expressed by AMBIDDY-1
on Venezuela TV deprecating largescale revenge during the re-
construction pilase and voiced hope that he would do his share to
see these noble ideas put inte effest.
car Policy
Artine's 201 file
SEQUET
Henry D. Recksher
14-00000
29 June 1964
ANWORLD MEETING IN NEW ORLEANS, 24 June 1964
SUBJECT: Adlaida PADRON y Crus - Decision to Nove Her to
Nicaragua
1. Drawing liberally upon data supplied in UPGA 16512,
ve reminded AMBIDDY-1 about our misgivings regarding his
association with Adelaida PADRON y Cruz. He conceded aware-
hess of some of the rumors circulating about her past private
life and stated that be had satisfied himself that they were
unfounded. We injected that we knew that Jose Mole Rosales
has been asked to do some investigating and had given Adelaida
Padron a clean bill of health. We also happened to know that
KXI was aware of the true story and for reasons of his own
had decided to withhold it from ANBIDDY-1. we inquired what
he knew about Senora MOLI and he commented that she had been
a "bad women". We observed that the "had been" vas open to
question.
2. AMBIDDY-1 averred that he had listened to a telephone
conversation betoon Adelaida and ber forser husband, Roger
Rejas Lavernis, in which the latter had adnitted that the story
about his having acted under higher orders when marrying
Adolatda vere unfounded. AKBIDDY-l also charged the ex-husband
of hoving tried to untice his wife to participate in ergies,
bus tant Adelaida hed refused to do so.
3. As regards Adelaida's alleged illicit relationship
with ex-President BATISTA, AMBIDDY-1 simply declared the charge
to be unfounded. Adelaida did kesy Carlos CANTILLO Gonzales
the wo an old fried of the family. She also had met ex-Presi-
dat Jums, but nothing of a compromising nature had ensued.
4. When Gebed whether te me tous thes Advlatda bad intro-
deod bia to several prominent Venezusians, he denied this and
stated that introdestions had been made by stivia GARCIA,
Brusted childhood friend of ANBIDDY-1.
SECRET
-2-
5. Our query why Adelaida, if she had AMBIDDY-1's
interests at heart, appeared to have qualms about oming up
in respect to past events, was parried by AMBIDOY-1 by claiming
that Adelaida was of course aware of all these rumors and had
warned his of possible political embarrassment.
6. Evaluating UFGA 16512 on the basis of our talk with
AMBIDUY-1, we conclude that its main source has a high batting
average. At least there appears to be a hard core of truth to
practically all allegations made, to the extent we ware able
to check them out. We would venture the gross that, despite
his protestations to the contrary, AMBIDDY-1 is quite conversant
with Adelaida's past history, but can see no practical gain in
so telling us.
He may reason that an avowel of intent to marry
a woman whose antecedents are in fact as described, would seriously
blemish his image and that by pleading ignorance now he can, if
things should get out of control, always strike a pose of injured
Innocence and elicit a 'here but for the Grace of God ge I" re-
action from his PBPRIME associates.
7. Agreement that all interested parties would benefit by
zoving Adelaida's abode from the WAVE area to Bicaragua was
reached on the basis of ANBIDDY-1's acceptance of our flat state-
mant that we view Adelaida as a potential hazard to AMWORLD's and
KUMARK'a security. He based this reasoning upon numerous indt
ications that Adelaide had become all but completely privy to
everything that was going on in AMWORLD and that her discretion
Left a great deal to be desired. We drew no dental from ANBIDDY-1
shen stating that Adelaide had become witting of the WAVE training
course for AMBIDDY-1 and that she presumably knew about KITBARK
support for ANJORLD. We referred to Adelaida's lesbian associates,
without stating that we suspected her of holding charter nembership
in that cererity. He antioned by name Aida FEREZ and Lucia CANO.
When the latter was labelled by us a lesbian believed to be in
Adelaida's complute cmtidende, AMBIDDY-1 evinced surprise and
fer recsene difficult to fathom almost disaay, we concluded by
stressing the importance of breaking up adalatda's strale of
associates and confidants as an indispensable prerequisite for
containing the threat her access to informatica we consider
classified represents and asked ANBIDOT-1 te sake sure that no
member of this group would follow her to Kisaragua.
SECRET
14-00000
-3-
8. We made no attempt, which in any case would have been
vain, to break up the relationship between AMBIDDY-1 and
Adelaida. We apologized to him for involving ourselves in
matters of a private and intimate nature which unfortunately
være beginning to impinge upon ODYOKE security interests.
ANBIDOT-1 in turn made it clear that he thinks he is in love
and that separation is not in the cards. We dropped the
issue by assuring AMBIDDY-1 that the day would come when things
could be soon in better perspective and that he could depend on
*us not to gloat of rewind him that we had told him se.
9. We mentioned offhand that we assumed that Adelaida
had all the papers necessary to effect her departure fron
POPRIMR. AMBIDDY-1 replied that she had not been able yet to
get the necessary papers. We simply commented that she should
ask for then.
HAVE
ADELAIDA 201
ARTDE' 201✓
Counterintelligamse
SECRET
Henry D. Hecksher
SECRET
29 June 1964
Debriefing of Russell H. Sambora in Wash., D.C. 16 June 1964
SUBJECT: DMJK Engineers
Banbora reported he met with AMBIDDY/1 at the Miami
airport on 5 June 1964 for a brief discussion of organi-
zational changes. After their talk, A/l requested Sambora
accompany him to the airport hotel to act as interpretor
with an American engineer (possibly DMJM). Sambora did
not recall the name of the engineer but that the engineer
had stated the airstrip in Nicaragua would cost somewhere
in the vicinity of a million dollars. According to
Sambors, A/1 simply listened to the proposal and said he
would take the matter under advisement.
File: DMJM
Sambora
AMEIDDY/1
SECRET
Raul J. Hernandes
TR/BA/80/HH
14-00000
SECRET
OLUNT
A-1
ANFORLD Meeting in Miani, 28 June 1964
SUBJECT: Photographs of Adolaida Padron
1. During a lull in the meeting I took AMBIDDY-1
naide (as instructed) and told him it would be best
for all concerned to take Adelaida out of POPRINE as
ho had suggested. I mentioned to him there is a growing
number of reports en Adelaida finding their way to
Vashington, making it increasingly difficult for us to
protect his rear.
3. I then casually mentioned to him that we had
received come obscene photographs which have caused us
to do some fast talking with "some people in Washington"
that are beginning to have some sisgivings about
AMRIDOT-1 (actually this story is notional).
3. I noticed the remark concerning the photographs
uport ANBIDDY-1. "Do you mean immoral pictures, Kartin?"
AMRIDDY-1 inquired. I nodded and to avoid his asking
further questions about the pictures, I reminded him of
Die promise that Lucia Cano, Natacha d'Angelo (AMBIDDY-1.
denied knowing her) and Aida Peres Pozo would not follow
Adelaida to Nicaragua.
4. Daring the rest of the meeting AMBIDDY-1 appeared
to be somewhat dejected and preoccupied. It is the opinion
of the Co's attending the meeting that this was attributed
to the rezarks made concerning the existence of these
photographs.
8. in the necting was about to end, AMBIDDY-1 asked
Dogen, "ומן מסע מפy have some seral pictures of
Kirting" Again I said "You." These
photographs had come into our possession plus much more
SECRET
Excluded from ente
Bond, reding and
14-00000
2
information that we had not divulged to him. AMBIDDY-1
then inquired if he could see the photographs. I replied
that it was our feeling that it would serve no useful
purpose other than to satisfy his own curiosity. Inasmuch
as he had promised to take Adelaide out of the country,
there was no sense in rubbing salt into the wound. Further
more, we did not wish to reveal our sources to AMBIDDY-1.
Lastly, both he and I know that photographs could be..
fabricated and we did not want to be falsely accused of
doing just this. AMBIDDY-1 again asked that I inform
BECKHOFF that he is interested in seeing the pictures.
In order to drop the entire subject, I promised AMBIDDY-1
I would pass the message to BECKHOFF.
6. BECKHOFF believes that this (notional) intervention
Jarred ANBIDDY-1 out of his complacent assumption that we
lack substantial information to back up our claim that
Adelaida's immoralities are more than unprovable rumors.
Also, hopefully, he may now have been put on guard and
say take adequate precautions against blackmail of himself
er Adelaida which we consider a major threat to the security
of ANWORLD. If in future meetings AMBIDDY-1 should revert
to the existence of these photographs, it may be best to
state that they were promptly destroyed but that their also
being in the possession of potential blackmailers can never
be ruled out. ANBIDDY-1 should be reminded of his assurance
to alert us immediately if such blackmail attempts are made
since he may need our help in varding them off. He has
our assurance that we would not use the cropping up of
such difficulties to remind him of his failure to heed our
varaings.
File:
-1
Adelaida Padren
Aida Pono
Lucia Cane
Raul J. Hernandes
WE/SA/CO/H
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
ANWORLD Moeting in Miami, 28 June 1964
BUBJECT:
AMBIDDY-1's Dream House and Personal Finances
1. Without impugning AMBIDDY-1's right to purchase
a home we advised him that many derogatery roports have
reached our ears concerning his purchase of a home and
for this reason only we wanted to sot the record straight
and thereby be in a better position to combat malicious
rumors, A-l said he understood and it was evident A-1
did not take it (the inquiry) as a personal affront.
During a break in the meeting A-1 wont home to obtain the
Recessary data on the house. Within a few hours A-1
returned with the information plus a blueprint of the
house.
8. A-1 stated the only house he owns in the one
in which he and Adelaida are now residêng. This house
is located at 1370 N. 8. 85 Street, Miami, Florida.
The original downpayment was 86,500. The monthly pay-
nent on the house is $330. The funds for the downpayment
vore obtained from:
6. His own personal bank account ($4,000).
Adelaida contributed money she had received
fren an automobile accident ($1,000)..
6. The balance was borrowed from Sinto Mesa (81,800),
A- added that the money borrowed from Adelaida and
Nees was paid back to them. According to A-1 the house
is valued at $38.000, A-1 was asked why the houre WES
net registered in iis name, A-1 replied this was done
to prevent rumors from starting as to where he had gotten
the money. For this reason the house is regzoterod in
the name of Antonio Bana (A-1's bodyguard). As soon as
Adelaida departs for Nicaragua, A-1 intends to lease the
house to fans for $130 a month.
SECRE
14-00000
SEC
':
3. Without being asked A-1 stated he wanted to
clarify his financial situation since his return from
prison. A-1 reported he has earned $4,500 from the
sale of Marchas de Guerra y Cantos de Presidio; from
the sale of the book Bay of Pigs he has so far earned
$4,300 in royalties of which $1,000 has been sent to
the underground in Cuba. His personal bank account at
present totals $1,700. A-1 also maintains he has
no other bank account in any other country.
4. We again mentioned to A-1 that our sale purpose
vas to bear the facts from him to prevent the waggling
of idle tongnes..
AMBIDDY-1 - 201
Adelaida - 201
Antonio Sana - 201
SECRET
Raul J. Hernandes
VE/SA/BQ/H
6407
MRR
Movimiento de Recuperacion Revolucionaria
2212 Ν. Ε. 3 COURT
ΜΙΑΜΙ, 37, FLORIDA
PLAN
10
THE HOUSE
MAIN
ROOM
CLOSET
CLUSET
DINNING ROOM.
ROOM
KITCHEN
LIVING ROOM
CLOSET
BRIM
OFFICE
WALL
CLOSED
FR 1-6408
BATH
CLOSET
ROOM
UTILITY
NOOM
GARAGE
14-00000
TRANSLATION
SECHEL
1. Address: 1270 N. E. 85 Street, Miami, Florida.
The downpayment for the house was $6,500. Monthly
payments which have to be madeper month, $230.
2. Where did I get the money?
نو
a. From the book Bay of Pigs I have earned
$4,300 of which I have to doduct $1,000 I sent to
the underground; thereby leaving a balance of $3,300.
b. From the sale of Marchas de Guerra y Cantos
de Presidio, $4,500.
6. This gave no the sume of $4,500 plus $4,300
giving me a total of $8,800.
d. At the time of buying the house: $4,000
from my own bank account, $1,000 from Adelaida, an
automobile accident from which she received $1,400
and $1,500 loaned to me by Sixto Mesa. Tito Mesa
and Adelaida's money I have paid back to them.
e. I have remaining in the bank $2,300 ninus
$600 which I have spent on other tings leaving, ne
a total of $1,700. The house is not under ny name
but in Antonio Sans's name.
8. The house is valued at $5,000.
SECRET
14-00000
26 June 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Telephone Conversation between AMBIDDY-1
DATE
:
and Martin Ferrer
26 June at 1130 hours
I telephoned AMBIDDY-1 at his home and informed
him that we (Carl, Dick and I) would be meeting with
him on Sunday. We would need the following things
at this meeting:
a. A complete up-to-date roster of the
personnel in the organization as they are re-
shuffled.
b. Return of all insurance forms which are
no longer applicable.
c. To at least have a formulated idea as to
what their operational plans will be for July and
and any requests for data which Carl will have
to obtain.
Raul J. Hernandy
Raul J. Hernandes
WH/SA/80/HH
File:
AMBIDDY-1-201
Conversations
.
Abeve ennvertatle... conducted
in preamenged Apeuently
changed privety srode
SECRET
14-00000
XX
Chief of Station, JHWAVE
Deputy Chief, WH (Special Affairs)
TYPIC/AMWORLD-Identity
RKF8: A. UFGA 16512, 15 June 1964
B. DIR 31528
:
1. Chief, WH requests that an investigation of the truth of
some of the allegations rade in Ref à report be held in abeyance
pending determination whether Subject in fact has decided to leave
PEPRIMS for Nicaragua.
2. Headquarters continues to be interested in additional data
regarding the house in the WAVE area which AMBIDDY-1 intends to
purchase in the name of Nilo Messer.
3. If it should turn out that the conditions described in
Ref report are not drastically remedied and continue to pose a
festering threat to the security of ANWORLD, your station may have
to be requested to investigate. In the meanwhile, we are hopeful
that Subject's removal from the WAVE area will serve to attenuate
this bad situation.
4. Thanks to def a report, we were able (without going into
too such sordid detail) to put AMBIDUY-1 on notice that we view his
association with Subject in the WAVE area as a potential threat to
ANWORLD' and EUBARK's security and that the political scandal
potential of the existing situation is equally formidable. We
consequently fell in with AMBIDDY-1's suggestion, made during the
latest reeting in Panama City, that he rove the center of his illicit
affair to Manngua where it would be easier to contain unpleasant
repercussions than in the WAVE area. We urged AMBIDDY-1, and he
promised to hood our advice, that ne dot permit subject to take
along to Ficaragua members of her present entourage, singling out
Identity O of Ref A as a particular cate in point.
5. It should be stressed that AMBIDDY-1 is unwavering in his
(real ar feigned) conviction that Subject is pure as driven snow and
badly maligned and that he has a ready explanation for every "rmor."
It would have been unvise to attempt coercing him into discontinuing
his affair with Subject, and most likely he would not have yielded to
any prekoures. Hence, we had no choice but to settle for the pro-
poved nove to Nicaragua which represents a palliative at best.
Distribution!..
4- 000, JHAVE
WR/BA/SO/HH
File: PADRON 201
AMBIDUY-1 201
Lucia Cano 201
Kenneth H. Philbrock
9208 3963
ge June 1804
BECRET/RTE/ZED
16-134-27/3
WH/SA/BO/HH HDHecksher bh
4315
DC/WH/BA
14-00000
BECHET/REBA
UKTER SEPARATE COVER ATTACHMENT TO UFOV 3063, dated 29 Juло 04
Identity - Adelaida PiDECH y Crea
DESLISITIZED
14-00000
SECRET
30 April 1964
Debriefing of Russell H. Sambora in Wash., D.C. 16 June 1964
SUBJECT: Rebezzlement of Funds by Mario Delgado Suelueta
1. Banbora reported that Delgado, who is the head
of logistics in Costa Rica, was accused of embezzling
$1,000 from AMWORLD. A/1 conducted a personal investigation
of the case. The final outcome of the case: He was asked
to make restitution out of his salary until the entire
amount had been repaid.
2. This case in point was brought up by Sambora to
illustrate that A/1 rpends a great deal of his time on
relatively minor tasks which could easily be delegated
to someone else.
Piles Barbora
Delgado
Goparrading and
SECRET
Raul J. Hernandes
VE/BA/SO/HE
14-00000
SECRET
DEBRIEFING of Russell H. BANBORA in Washington, D.C., 16 June 1984
SUBJECT: Loose Talk on Telephone
As an illustration of poor security of AMBIDDY/1
Sambora cited the example of how 4/1 had telephoned
Sixto Mesa on 14 June 1964 from Nicaragua to notify him
that the operation had been called off due to bad weather.
File: Banbora
epe. Bolivar
GROUP 1
Excluded from autematis
SECRET
Raul J. Hernandes
WR/BA/80/HR
14-00000
FBI DOCUMENT
DATE: 11 JUNE 1954
CLASSIFICATION: CONFIDENTIAL
SUBJECT: ANTI-FIDEL CASTRO ACTIVITIES
FBI FILE #: UNKNOWN
MANUEL ARTIME
14-00000
United Blates Senate
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE
June 9, 1964
Mr. Manuel Artime Buesa
Movimiento de Recuperacion Revolucionaria
221? Northeast 2nd Court
Miland 37, Florida
Dear Mr. Artime:
This is to acknowledge and to thank you for your
thoughtfulness in writing to me.
It was very gratifying for me to mention your daring
raid on the port of Pilon in my speech of May 20th..
Felicidades. I wish you the very best in your future actions
against Castro who poses a grave menace to all of the Americas.
I an very pleased that through the Referendum the Cuban
exile commmity now enjoys a central voice which can serve
to co-ordinate effective anti-Castro activity. Hopefully,
my Government will turn away from its ill-advised policy of
restricting the Cuban exiles, and aid people like yourself
to liberate the Cuban people from the Castro-Communist dicta-
torship. To that end let so assure you of my continued support.
Please do not hesitate to write me again.
With every best wish, I a
Biscarely youre,
CESORO A. EMATHERS
United States Senator
14-00000
SENDER WILL CHECK CLASS. CATION TOP AND BOTTOM
UNCLASSIFIED
CONFIDENTIAL
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
SECRET
TO
NAME AND ADDRESS
1
2
Shunwoad
Art 201 File
HH #
ACTION
SA/s0/ Boblue
APPROVAL
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
Remarks:
DIRECT REPLY
DISPATCH
FILE
INFORMATION
DATE
SECRET
INITIALS
S
PREPARE REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
RETURN
SIGNATURE
1-5 have you come to ay
decision in regard to an internal
Mailing to Papa through
Mama mia th Srikit?
could be love of 13 uy.
FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
PROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO.
DATE
UNCLASSIFIED
CONFIDENTIAL
237 Use previous editions
AKCRKT
(40)
PRINTING OFFICE 19010-687198
14-00000
The following is a letter from AMBIDDY-1's father
to his son.
8 June 1934
My dear son Manolin,
It has been a while since we have received a letter
from you. We are writing this to find out how you are
and we suppose you are well. Here everyone is well,
thank God,
Your mother is not writing you because I am writing
it quickly so that it can leave today.
We have presented everything since 20 March as well
as depositing the price of the fares and we are only
waiting for permission to leave which we will soon have.
When it happens we will send you a cable.
Your Godmother Rosa is sick and when I saw her today
she told me she hoped you would come to liberate her,
Therefore we know you are doing your duty. I support your
position. Don Jaime is well, thank God.
I saw Emilita and she sends her love. She also told
ne to tell you to write Lino and his brother a letter
and to send it via this channel. Emilita is not going
there until you send 12 (the letter) and it should ba
done through this channel if it is possible.
That letter which is addressed to Conseule dala
Campa de B. put a stamp on it immediately and mail it
so it arrives at its destination. I am staying in her
father's home and I am very anxious to help har.
SECRET
14-00000
-2-
Well, Manolin, there is nothing else for the time
being; in reality, so much has been said about the situ-
ation that there is no
to resist the atmosphere.
Your mother and I send our blessing and will never
forget you.
M. Artime and Otilla Buesa
I congratulate you on Pilon. Emilita also asked me to
congratulate you.
SECRET
14-00000
let
written by A-1's & father
to A-1. Given to HS by A-l at New Orleans on 24 June 64
Junio 8/96
Mi querido Hijo Manolin-
Hace tiempo que monesi
bimos canta tuya z te hacemos iste para
Saber de tie saleed que supersemas kee
Asuena, por aqué estamos bien Bad.
Zu mamá
no
te esori-
be porque ésta, te la sety haciendo
de momento para que talga chora-
Lenemas presentads tales
derde al dia 20 de Marzo del precinte
depositado el imponte de los des
salo seperant al peamiss de
asi como
pasajes z
de salide que nos lo davan procine
mente, cuando esto sea te paveme
cable
-
In Madmin Roms
esta enferma y escando la vi hay me dij
give esperar que tu la viniens
tan asi pues, ya sabes que estes as
do a cumplir con tu diber,
actitud. Don Jasine esta bien les ad-
14-00000
ayer vi a Emiilita f
te manda un abrazo
cariñosogtambién me dijes que le caribers
a
Kino
una
mandavat
f que se la m
via. Emilita
canta para al jy las hermanso
;
a ella por esta
in alla hasta quie
se la mandes of
deber hasento a mecelta
?
de esta via si to es posible
igida
Esa canta que va dú-
a Consuelo de la Campa de 19.
lintamerite le pones franqueez la
en el corres para que Mique
destino-go estay parando en la casa
نه
de en ladne gestay interesantisumo e
Bus Maustin-made
sebine
-
en
nialidad, ye
as por se momento,
tanto se ha dicho de la trien que
ture te bendiem tus padres qui
te alvidan. Hetime y Cali
Ja felicito por lo de Palon-Ennlite tension
14-00000
Jemma 8/961
Manolin:
Een canta que va por
to Pra Concealls del Campa
Guatemala le poner to
I le monder enseguide-
Fe abrage en Padre
MhArtime
14-00000
Punma
ANWORLD Meeting in San Juan, 7-8 June 1964
SUBJECT: Adelaida Padron y Crus
1. AMBIDDY/1 himself raised this matter with ne
while neither James nor Ferrer were within earshot.
Quoting AMYUM/18, he inquired whether marriage with
Subject would be one of the causes for KUBARK to
terminate the existing AMWORLD relationship. I
caphatically answered in the negativs, going over by
nov vell-trodden ground once more and, hopefully,
making myself understood.
3. In summary, I stated we held no views one way
or the other about his intent to contract marriage.
Our concern was strictly political since we could
visualize a number of unpleasant consequences flowing
from the event. True or false, certain allegations
had been made about Subject's past and there were a
goodly number of people prepared to testify to the
accuracy of those allegations, among then (I presumed)
Subject's ex-husband. The political implications of
the proposed union could not possibly escape him,
especially if ANTHUG should get hold of it.
3. AHAJDDY/1 opined that he had lived in open
sin with Subject for over a year. This was what was
bothering him and evidently some of his closest
associates, not Subject's alleged past. He needed
this relationship with subject to maintain (literal
quote) his emotional balance. He was working under:
considerable strain and the rare moments with Subject
alone were his sole relaxation. The issue of sin was
deeply disturbing to him, and marriage, he felt, would
resolve this situation of conflict. In order to avoid
certain political repercussions, he was now giving
thought to taking Subject with his to Nicaragua and
contract a "ssoret" narriage. I did not point out to
him the evident flaws in his reasoning and merely
adverted to the great political responsibility he carries.
I made it very clear to him that a major scandal could
SECRET
14-00000
2
conceivably crystallize opposition to his person and
sink the ship. Since I did not interpose an outright
veto (of dubious efficacy at best), he will undoubtedly
profess to have convinced me of the soundness of his
headlong rush toward matrimony and all that could entail
for our progran. Short of making a mockery of autonomy,
I could not tell him any more than I did.
File:
ANBIDDY/1 201
Paaron 201
Henry D. Hecksher
WH/SA/SO/HE
SEORET
14-00000
Punma
ANVORLD Meeting in Ban Juan, 7-8 June 1964
SUBJECT: ANBIDDY/1's Political Reporting
1. I reminded Subject that in the past we had
frequently pressed him to keep us abreast of his
political activities with particular emphasis upon
relations with the host governments in Central America.
The response to our urgings had been increasingly
disappointing and of late reached the vanishing polat.
Since it was not curiosity that had prompted us to ask
for timely reporting but a desire to be of service in
protecting the rear, we were now wondering whether
it would not be best to leave the determination whether
or not to