1000000
104-10302-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DD/P2-13032
7/23/62.
Executive Registry
102-5265
25 July 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting on CA Matters with the Panel of the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
1. On 20 July 1962, the Director and the Deputy Director (Plans)
met with Messrs. Robert Murphy, Gordon Gray, William Langer, and
J. Patrick Coyne to discuss certain aspects of the Agency's Political
Action Programs. The Director sat with the Panel from 10:30 'til noon,
the Deputy Director (Plans) was present from 10:30 to 12:30 and from
2:00 to 3:30.
2. The Director opened the discussion with a historical description
of the Agency's covert financial support to political parties in the
fight against Commmism. He described in detail the procedures now in
effect whereby Political Action Projects are originated, staffed out,
and cleared with appropriate elements of Government. He pointed out
that each project must have his approval prior to its circulation to
the members of the Special Group. At this point, he digressed to inform
the Panel that reconnaissance overflights are now approved by the
Special Group and subsequently by the President. He said that this
same procedure applies to peripheral flights although to a lesser de-
gree. He terminated this part of the discussion by stating that in
his opinion "all covert action programs are now handled in an orderly,
correct manner".
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1998
13-Q0000
-2-
3. The Director then described in some detail Agency covert
8
financial support in the recent (Peru) elections, the last Creek elections,
87
and the the Finnish election. He also described our activities in con-
8
nection with the Italian political parties. Following this, he covered
our plans for the upcoming Brazilian elections. He touched on our
thoughts with regard to the political situation in British Guiang.
4. At this juncture, the Director discussed Agency labor opera-
tions. He read to the group a short paper which outlined our support
//
to anti-Communist labor unions in in (France) and Italy our work through
29
8
the ICFTU and our relationships with American] labor and the assistance
tes unions have given us.
United United States
5. Agency support to cultural organizations was raised by
Dr. Langer, and the Director covered in some detail the current status
of our support plus that of the Ford Foundation to the Congress for
Cultural Freedom and the International Commission of Jurists. He
touched on the Asia Foundation, and our desire to try to obtain the
services of Mr. Livingston Merchant to head it.
6. In the time remaining to him, the Director went over with the
Panel country by country an extended list of political parties and
leaders supported by the Agency throughout the world. What he did not
have an opportunity to cover in this list the Deputy Director (Plans)
finished during the remainder of the morning and during the afternoon
session.
10/mL
13-00000
-3-
7. Also in the afternoon, the Deputy Director (Plans) read to
the Panel a paper on Operation Mongoose which the Director had used
earlier in the day for briefing the President. This paper was used
on the instruction of the Director. The Panel asked questions about
Agency activity involving Cuba, all of which were answered with the
exception of one having to do with the role of the Attorney General.
This query was raised by Mr. Gray who recognized and gracefully ac-
cepted the fact that he was not answered directly.
8. Before the afternoon session adjourned, the Panel raised the
question of the total dollar amount of funds expended annually for
covert action. The Deputy Director (Plans) showed them a chart com-
piled by DDP-PG, dated 4 April 1962. This chart gives the precise
dollar amounts expended annually. These figures vary from the Congres-
sional ones since the support slice is not included.
Richard Helms
Deputy Director (Plans)
Distribution:
Original - The Director
1 cc Exec. Director
1 cc-C/CA-10
1 cc - DD/P
13-00000
11/9/62
2-5767
62-8090
2 November 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting on CA Matters with the Panel of the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
1. On 1 November, the Deputy Director (Plans) met with
Messrs. Robert Murphy, Gordon Gray, and J. Patrick Coyne to present
a follow-up briefing on the Agency's political action programs since
the one held on 20 July 1962. The meeting lasted from 2:30 to 4:45.
2. There was little discussion on Cuba. In response to
Mr. Murphy's inquiry, I told him that a good intelligence job had
been done but that I thought it desirable to have this studied by
the Board on the basis of a paper which the Director was having pre-
pared and which Mr. Kirkpatrick had assured Mr. Coyne would be sub-
mitted to the Board after the Director had had an opportunity to re-
view it.
8
3. The Brazilian Br an/election election program was covered in considerable
detail. Points covered were: (a) the reason for the program, (b) the
manner in which candidates were chosen, (c) the amount of money in-
volved, (d) the methods of funding, and (e) the coordination of State
and the Agency on the entire scenario. Following the presentation of
the factual elements, there was considerable discussion of the politi-
cal situation in (Brazil and the direction in which that Government
seemed to be tending.
гутс
13-00000
- 2
-
4. CIA-sponsored activities at the Helsinki Youth Festival was
the next item presented. A full report was given which followed care-
fully the post-mortem written by the CA Staff.
A
"
5. As for CA activities in the remainder of Latin America, the
following countries were covered: Dominican Republic, Chile, Peru
and [Venezuela). (Haiti) and British Guiana) were then touched on, with
24
particular reference to the sensitivity of the US-UK cooperation on
the latter.
6. In Southeast Asia, an up-to-date report was presented on
operations in Laos, South Vietnam, and North Vietnam. Problems in
connection with North Vietnamese operations were specifically identi-
fied.
24
29
7. On the Sino-Indian/conflict, the Panel was made aware of
pending and current requests from the Indian CIB for assistance in
the training of guerrilla forces. The role of the Tibetans was also
identified. In response to a query from Mr. Murphy, I said that I
did not see any requirement at this time for an increase of our perma-
"
nent establishment in India), expressing the opinion that any trainers
and paramilitary experts which we might send could be covered for us
8
by the Indians
8. In Europe, CA programs in the following areas were up-
"
//
11
dated: Berlin, France and Italy, Spain) (Finland), and (Cyprus)
12
13-00000
-3-
Mr. Murphy seemed particularly interested in the level of activity
in Italy and our efforts to cut it back.
9. At one point in the briefing, I spoke of the change in
status of the African-American Institute and told of our negotiations
with the Ford Foundation on the Congress for Cultural Freedom. I
6
mentioned the Department of State veto on passing funds to Holden
Roberto. There was some discussion of the Yemen and associated
problems. Here, I simply gave an intelligence briefing on the Yemen
and the effects of the revolution there on Saudi Arabia and the
British position in the Aden Protectorate.
Richard Helms
Deputy Director (Plans)
Distribution:
Original - Director, CIA
1 cc - Ехеc. Director
1 cc - Chief, CA
1 cc - DD/P
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
"SE ONLY
CONFIDENTIAL
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SUBJECT: (Optional)
FROM:
NO.
Office of the DD/P
Rm. 3-C-34-Hdqrs.
DATE
2- NOV 1962
TO: (Officer designation, room number, and
building)
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whom
to whom. Draw a line across column after each comment.)
RECEIVED FORWARDED
1.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ING
3NW WBK
2.
4/5/62
DDCI
1305
3.
EX. DIR. for feles
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
ORM
DEC 56
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS.
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
GPO 1961: 0-593644
:
13-00000
DD/P 3-1911
17 April 1963 Executive Registry
103-3249
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting on CA Matters with the Panel of the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
1. On 15 April, at DDP's request, I met with Messrs. Robert
Murphy, Gordon Gray, and J. Patrick Coyne to brief them on major
covert action developments since their previous briefing on
2 November 1962. The meeting lasted from 10:00 to 12:15.
2. At Mr. Murphy's request, I began with a description of our
electoral operations as approved by the Special Group in Chile, the
Dominican Republic, (Brazil) and Guatemala.,,Mr. Murphy was
particularly concerned with the situation in (Brazil) and both he and
Mr. Gray found it difficult to understand why the State Department 6
continued to provide large-scale economic assistance when Coulart7
had to date refused to clean house of the Communists and fellow
travelers both within the government and the labor movement. They
were interested in knowing that we were in touch with some of the
military leaders who are opposed to Goulart and they seemed to feel
that a military coup at some point might be preferable to allowing a
country as large and powerful as Brazil to drift into the hands of the
opposition. Both gentlemen wished to know the amounts that we had
expended in these electoral operations and our own estimate of the
results. They did not question either the need for intervention or
the size of our effort; although in the Chilean case Mr. Murphy wanted
to be sure that we had evidence that the funds passed through Italian] 8
hands actually reached the Chilean Christian Democrats.
8
3. Mr. Murphy then raised the Argentine problem and said
that he had been informed in New York that the State Department was
putting considerable pressure on the Argentine regime to persaade it
to hold the elections scheduled for June 1963. He questioned the
wisdom of this pressure, pointing out that there was a real danger
of the Peronistas returning to power if the elections were held. He
asked our opinion and I said that, despite the pressure, there was still
considerable doubt whether the elections would actually take place.
10/c
13-00000
I added that the more responsible military_were trying to work out with
f the Guido government and the non-Peronist political parties a formula
which would prevent the Peronistas from making large gains on the
national level.
8
11
4. On the subject of Haiti, Mr. Murphy felt that in so small a
country action should be possible to remove Duvalier and wondered
why it had not been done. I pointed out that we had as yet no policy
approval for such action but that we were active in identifying and
making contact with opposition elements both within Haiti and in exile.
I described some of the difficulties, such as Duvalier's control of
the arms in the palace and his widespread penetration of opposition
plotting that had just resulted in the rolling up of a coup attempt by
[Haitian/army officers.
5. Mr. Gray noted that he had seen in the newspapers a report
of our recent decision to allow Radio Liberty to broadcast in Russian
to the Soviet troops in Cuba. He was heartily in favor of such action
but wondered how we were able to obtain approval of it when the
Administration seems so anxious to avoid actions that might appear
to be provocative to the Soviets. I informed him that there had, in fact,
been some delay in obtaining the approval.
6. Both the gentlemen asked for detailed information on the
structure and workings of the Latin American Policy Committee (LAPC)
and asked whether we felt this committee in any way hampered or
interfered with the approval process in the Special Group. I said that
both Chief, WH and myself were well pleased with the way the LAPC
operates and believed it to be highly useful.
7. I then briefed them on actions which were taken in Southeast
Asia, particularly the measure to strengthen the border police in the
10 north of India. I told them that Nehru was aware of these actions and
they wanted to be certain Mr. Bowles was clearly instructed prior to
his departure as ambassador
8
6
8. Both men objected to press reports that certain Administration
officials believed the Sovies to be exerting a helpful and restraining
influence in Laos. I had to agree with them that it was hard to maintain
such a view in the face of the increasing aggressiveness of the Pathet Lao,
and I described the existing policy limits on our relations with Phoumi76
and Kong Le, I then described the present state of the Soviet-Chinese
2
1/
Tmc
13-00000
split and some of our efforts to exploit and exacerbate these tensions.
Mr. Murphy asked for specific information on the extent of trade, if
any, between China and the Soviet Union and the amount of the out-
standing Chinese debt to the Soviets. I agreed to provide this via
Mr. Coyne. Mr. Gray asked about the depth and extent of our
intelligence from Peking and the China mainland, and was critical of
the information supplied to us by the Chinese Nationalists. I said
that intelligence operations in China were not my field but that I would
make sure that a report on this did get to them.
9. I went on to describe the cultural ferment within Russia and
recent action Khrushchev had taken to discipline the dissident writers
and artists. They were very much interested in the actions welhad
taken to exploit this situation and particularly interested in the current
issue of Encounter and in the account therein of the Khrushchev tirade
at the recent art exhibition.
10. On Cuba I explained that I was not in a position to brief
them in depth and any questions in this field would be handled by the
Director or DDP. I did, however, brief them on the Krulak Committee
and the recent meetings in Managua regarding measures that could be
taken to limit the export of subversion from Cuba. (I have sent to
them via Pat Coyne the CIA Memorandum on the present scope of the
Cuban subversive training effort.)
8
11. I described the covert support to the Italian political parties
for the forthcoming parliamentary election as approved by the Special
Group. Mr. Murphy had not previously known of the decision to lend
some selective support to the Nenni autonomists and described this
decision with some surprise "as quite a switch. 8
8
12. Finally.gwhen informed of the policy limitations on our
relations with the Angolan Nationalists and Holden Roberto Mr. Murphy
expressed himself as being in agreement with those limitations and
seemed to feel that the best course to follow was to assist the Portuguese)
Government in its attempts to control the situation. He said that he had
met recently for the first time with Roberto Holden in New York last
week and was not impressed by the man.
6
3
13-00000
13. The meeting was throughout a cordial one and I detected
no evidence of a critical attitude towards the Agency's covert
action program.
CORD MEYER, JR.
Chief
Covert Action Staff
Distribution:
Orig. - Director, CIA
1 cc - Exec. Director
1 cc-C/CA
1 cc - DD/P
66 12 10 of VW..03
13-00000
DCI
lopy!
[BYE 4242-6
23
8/19/98
Assassinatio
Record
Michelle
Handle Via Indicated Controls
99
[BYEMAN]
/////
Save cy 2
of this
document to
chos. Enught
on Tang 1964
WARNING
This document contains information offecting the national security of the United States within the mean.
ing of the espionage lows U. S. Code Title 18, Sections 793 and 794. The law prohibits its transmis.
sion or the revelation of its contents in any manner to an unauthorized person, as well as its use in any
manner prejudicial to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of ony foreign govern.
ment to the detriment of the United States. It is to be seen only by U. S. personnel especially indoc.
trinated and authorized to receive information in the designated control channels. Its security must be
maintained in accordance with regulations pertaining to the designated controls.
This document contains information referring to Projects:
CORONA..
(CLASSIFICATION)
99
TACKLE...............
③
13-00000
TOP SECRET
24 April 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board,
1015, Tuesday, 23 April 1963
Present: Dr. Killian, Mr. Murphy, Mr. Clifford, Mr. Pace,
Gen. Doolittle, Mr. Gray, Dr. Langer, Dr. Land;
Staff members Messrs. Coyne and Ash;
From CIA: Mr. McCone, Mr. FitzGerald,
Mr. Bruce Clarke, Mr. Lyman Kirkpatrick
1. When Mr. McCone entered the room the group had been discussing
the release of the American prisoners in Cuba, and it had been explained to
the Board that the three CIA men who had been imprisoned had been released.
Mr. Murphy had asked what their cover story had been and had been told
that they represented themselves as conducting audio surveillance for com-
mercial interests, and that their fictitious names had apparently held up
during interrogation.
Mr. Murphy asked Mr. McCone the conditions of the release of the
22 and the DCI explained that at Castro's request we were trying to obscure
the fact that there had been a quid pro quo in releasing the four Cubans in
exchange for the 22 Americans. The Attorney General had arranged the
release of the three Cubans who had been accused of, but not convicted of
sabotage, and Mr. McCone had personally arranged the release of Molina
with Governor Rockefeller, who had granted him executive clemency with
deportation. Mr. McCone noted that the release of the three CIA persons
was very important to the Agency, and that nothing in the agreement for the
release involved any other commitments.
Mr. Murphy asked what the DCI thought was behind Castro's making
these releases. Mr. McCone replied that it was probably domestic foibles,
and that Donovan was the only thread open to the United States. Mr. Clifford
asked if we had everyone out that we wanted. The DCI replied that he knew
of no one else there that we wanted. He reported that Donovan had to make
a statement that he would not return to Cuba, advised that he had no intention
of returning at this time, and he would have to use another cover if he did
return. Dr. Land asked why Castro did all this, and the DCI said we didn't
really know, but one possibility offered by Donovan was that Castro
apparently is interested in trying to reach
some rapprochement with
TOP SOPALT
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
13-00000
4
TOP SECRET
the United States, that Donovan says he is not a Communist, and that Fidel
didn't know how to go about making any accommodation with the U.S.
because he was so closely surrounded by advisers who were watching every-
thing he did. Mr. McCone said that Castro had specifically requested that
the President, the Attorney General and the DCI be advised of his attitude.
Mr. Clifford asked why Castro wanted the DCI to know, and Mr. McCone
said he had no idea, because at no time during the Donovan negotiations was
any indication given that CIA was being consulted or advised. Dr. Killian
then suggested that the Board turn to the briefing on Cuba. Mr. McCone
said there were several things he wished to discuss before going on to that
briefing.
2. Mr. McCone reported that on coordination the NRO agreement was
in effect and working pretty well. An agreement had been reached on the
complete and comprehensive use of the NPIC facilities by DIA, and NPIC
was developing well. The Special Group has expanded its review of counter-
insurgency activities to include those of the DOD, and they are now cognizant
of DOD activities in this field. In the field of current intelligence reporting,
we are now attempting to correct the DIA and CIA bulletins and to establish
one bulletin with increased DIA input and with DIA issuing addendum.
Mr. McCone said this was supported at the DOD stage by the Secretaries.
He noted that he was attempting to get all issues with the DOD settled by the
15th of May so that they can be fully implemented before Mr. Gilpatric leaves
in June. He said that in the clandestine collection field the work of Defense
was being fully and carefully coordinated on a regular basis. Mr. McCone
said that reasonable progress was being made on the five areas of coordina-
tion. He said that he and Mr. McNamara had postponed the reorganization
of USIB. It was going along all right as it was and they didn't see any point
of creating problems on the Hill by a reorganization at this time.
16
3. Mr. McCone reported that recent CORONA and TACKLE flights over
China produced the best photography we have ever had, and that he had not
set up a formal briefing for the Board because of their busy schedule. He
advised that there was one point concerning ICBM complexes in the Soviet
Union which he wished to call to the attention of the Board. The last CORONA
flight had revealed one new ICBM complex and this now located these
installations in 18 separate places. He noted that these complexes ranged
from four pads to possibly as many as 18. This might well indicate that
18 launching pads were standard, and if the support facilities are proportioned
similar to the one with 18 pads, there might well be as many as 18 times 18
launching pads, or a total of about 450. Mr. McCone advised that at this time
we were analyzing each one to determine the level of support facilities.
-2-
TOP SECRET
1/mc
13-00000
TOP SECRET
The photograph was being reviewed for clearer guide lines as to construction
time. He said he saw no reason to change the mid-'63 estimate of 125 to 150
launching sites, but there might be reason to change the future estimate.
Dr. Langer asked how many sites there were with 18 pads and Mr. McCone
replied, "Only one."
4. Dr. Land stated that CORONA was getting better and better, and
he hoped that all of those in the pursuit of a better vehicle would not forget
that CORONA is doing the job. Mr. McCone replied that this was true, and
said that he had the schedule for satellite launchings which he would leave
with the Board. This called for CORONA-M once a month to July, with an
extra one in May, and CORONA-J once a month from May 1963 to July 1964,
with two in September. If trouble develops with the "J" configuration, "M"
can be continued once a month until March. The next (LANKYKAKERD shot is
scheduled for early next month and will be followed by three more. The first
99 GAMBIT shot is scheduled in June, and will then be launched once a month
through all of 1964. Mr. McCone noted that if there were future failures,
there should be no hiatus and a maximum of only seven days' delay between
shots.
724
5. Mr. McCone reported that the OXCART vehicle would have one more
flight at Mach 2.5, and then would be pushed up to its full speed and altitude.
General Doolittle noted that the next ( 6 ) increase presented very serious
engineering problems. Mr. McCone said that this was thoroughly understood
but he wanted the Board to be apprised of the status.
6. Mr. McCone reported that he was establishing a panel to make a
judgment as to what additional steps should be taken to bring satisfactory
photography in the area of resolution. He noted that he felt we were dealing
too much in optimistic hope at the present time, and that he wanted the best
possible judgment as to the resolution that could be achieved from satellite
photography in order to be weighed with the political decision of overflying
the Soviet Union. He stated that he had gone to Cambridge to see
Dr. Edward Purcell in an effort to persuade him to chair a panel which
would be composed of the best brains from both inside and outside the Govern-
ment. He reported that he felt he must be able to tell the President when
satellite photography would reach the desired resolution. Mr. McCone
advised that he had a memorandum establishing the terms of reference of
this committee which he would submit to the President's Board. He noted
that there were many studies oriented toward the most exotic types of
reconnaissance, including the best read-out, but that he wanted this com-
mittee to be completely impartial and objective and therefore was establishing
it under his personal direction. He noted that he had the enthusiastic support
- 3
-
4/mc
13-00000
TOP SECRET
of DOD in doing this. He said he would like the support of the President's
Board and their thoughts on the terms of reference and the membership,
including whether they thought some members of the Board might sit on the
committee or whether this would present a conflict of interest, as the Board
had apparently felt in a previous matter.
Dr. Killian asked if this panel was supposed to look at the future poten-
tiality of satellite photography, and Mr. McCone then read to the Board the
terms of reference in his memorandum. He noted that he thought this panel
should be constituted at this time because there were serious doubts in the
U.S. Government about flying an aircraft over the USSR. Mr. Clifford
asked if the panel would deal with politics, and Mr. McCone replied, "No."
Dr. Land asked what the relations of the panel would be with NRO and
Mr. McCone replied that NRO would support the panel. Gen. Doolittle noted
that the Air Force had a committee on satellite survivability, and
Mr. McCone said that he knew this, but felt that that committee was not full
out and not devoting the effort that the seriousness of the problem warranted.
Gen. Doolittle replied that he was a member of that committee and he
thought they were giving the problem very serious consideration. Mr. McCone
said he thought the problem involved a vast amount of work and he was
concerned because all of the views were not being pulled together. He noted
that what was necessary was to get an authoritative expression as to what
resolution was required down to the nearest inch in order to determine the
engineering of missiles..
Mr. Land asked what Dr. Purcell had said, and commented that he
thought such a panel would be all right if it was composed of four or five
who knew what they were talking about. Mr. McCone replied that he was
not sure he had been able to get Purcell, and that he might have to ask
Dr. Land to persuade Purcell; Dr. Land replied that he might be able to do it.
98
24
7. Mr. Pace asked whether there had been one or two U-2 flights over
China. Mr. McCone replied that there had been two, and that they had
gaseous diffusion plant. He noted that the preparations are just half those
of the Soviet plant, of which it may be a duplicate. He said that this was
not understood, and noted that, as presently constituted, the plant could not
produce cascades to develop the quality of the top product. He noted that it
could possibly be another process, metallurgical or textile, but on another
area there were a large number of cooling towers. Mr. McCone advised
that he had set up a special group under Dr. Roddis to study the Chinese
nuclear energy program. This group has made a report in which they pointed
out the paucity of the information available. However, they had put together 7
-4-
1/mc
13-00000
TOP SECRET
98 24
a whole lot of intelligence information and had come to the conclusion that
the Chinese Communists were making a tremendous effort in this field
and were possibly nearer the stage of exploding some device. He reported
that the Board of Estimates was making a new estimate on the subject at
this moment and that the program was being supplemented by intensive over-
flights. Dr. Land asked whether the DCI saw any problems in using the A-12
over China, and Mr. McCone said that he didn't and, furthermore, that he
personally didn't see any problem in using it over the USSR.
8. Mr. McCone advised that he had taken some additional steps to
pull together the Agency's scientific and technical assets. He had established
a Research and Development Review Board. He said that it didn't seem wise
at this time to relocate OSI and TSD. The Office of Scientific Intelligence
analyzes and makes estimates on the basis of incoming intelligence, and its
removal from DD/I would take away an essential link in the process of that
area. He said further that TSD was directly linked to the operational aspects
of DD/P, and he didn't feel it should be removed from that area. He noted
that the Research and Development Review Board would meet under General
Carter biweekly and would provide cross fertilization and coordination. He
said that he would provide a copy of the memorandum establishing this Board
and read to the Board the membership.
-5-
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
9. Mr. McCone then turned to a discussion of Cuba and stated that
he was giving the Special Group this afternoon a study showing the results
of 51 days' reconnaissance over Cuba and that this was disturbing when the
four principal targets were analyzed. There were 59 occasions when
weather precluded any readout of what was going on in these four Soviet
military camps. Some of the camps were not seen for five or six days in
a row and in one instance for as long as 12 successive days. Mr. McCone
then read from the memorandum on reconnaissance over Cuba dated 23 April
1963 and said he would provide the Board with a copy.
The DCI then reported that James Donovan during a nighttime drive
to Veradero had passed a convoy of 25 very large trucks, the type generally
carried on railroad flatcars. Mr. McCone stated that an examination of the
photography for that day and the following day provided absolutely no trace
of the convoy. Dr. Land stated that the DCI's previous statement may have
provided the answer as to where this convoy might be. The DCI said he
planned to recommend low-level flights in order to provide more information.
10. At this point Mr. FitzGerald was asked to give his presentation on
operations in Cuba. He commenced by displaying the chart which indicated
the number of resident agents, illegal teams, legal teams, shipboard agents
and penetrations of Cuban installations. He noted that the number of illegal
teams had risen to three as a result of a successful operation on Sunday,
and one of these teams had as many as 100 subagents with extensive coverage
in the province of Pinar del Rio. Dr. Langer asked what the subagents were
looking for, and Mr. FitzGerald replied that their coverage was mostly
military. Mr. Murphy asked if these agents were all strictly collecting
intelligence, and Mr. FitzGerald replied that this was their primary purpose
at the moment, but the illegals could create a resistance net if this was
desired. He pointed out that the policy at the present time precluded attempt-
ing to develop a large scale dangerous activity.
Mr. FitzGerald pointed out that the penetration of Cuban installations
were mainly diplomatic installations and that some 14 Cuban diplomats were
our agents. Mr. Clifford asked how the information was gotten out of Cuba,
and Mr. FitzGerald replied that it was mostly by secret writing transmitted
10 to Mexico City by mail and then forwarded to Washington. He said there
were four radios in Cuba and that we now had a greatly improved medium 24
speed transmitter that was quite small, the the size of about two cigarette cartons
and it could get a message off in just 60 seconds. He said that there was a
smaller and better transmitter currently in the process of development.
-6-
TOP SECUT
4/mc
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Dr. Land asked if the loss of this transmitter would compromise others.
Mr. FitzGerald replied that it would not compromise any other agents
except the one apprehended, and the DCI noted that it would simply com-
promise the instrument.
24
Mr. Murphy asked concerning the quality of substantive reporting,
and Mr. FitzGerald noted that the 1,040 reports looked impressive, but it
was quite true that this was not a true indication. He said that some of the
reporting was very good, and there were two Cuban ambassadors on the
payroll who provided some first-rate reports and were closest to the bone
in what Castro was thinking. Mr. Murphy asked if we had Castro's
immediate entourage penetrated, and Mr. FitzGerald said his sister worked
for us but that she didn't always have inside information. He pointed out
that the 665 reports from resident agents were primarily on military targets,
and the intelligence community felt they were really worthwhile as a supple-
ment to overhead reconnaissance. General Doolittle asked if an illegal
team was twomen and Mr. FitzGerald replied "yes". Mr. Murphy asked
whether these agents provided information on Soviet troop strength and
equipment, and Mr. FitzGerald replied in the affirmative. Mr. Clifford
noted that with just two illegal agent teams in Cuba at this time we were
back to where we started from in 1962. Mr. FitzGerald commented that the
casualty rates were very high and referred to the charts "Legal Resident
Agents in Cuba" and "Illegal Agent Development".
in.)
(At this point Mr. McCone left the meeting and Mr. Cottrell came
Mr. Gray asked if the modest number of agents was a result of
policy or operations. Mr. FitzGerald replied that this was primarily a
result of operations and noted that it was not the result of lack of effort, but
because of the high attrition rate and the dangers involved. He went over
the lists of what had happened to the agents that were put in. He noted that
it was presently planned to carry out approximately five operations a month.
Mr. Murphy asked if there was evidence of organized resistance in Cuba.
Mr. FitzGerald replied "yes", but they were now small bands scattered
throughout the island. He noted that Castro had broken up the large country-
wide resistance networks last summer. He then produced the chart entitled
"Illegal Infiltration Exfiltration Operations" and commented on this.
Mr. Murphy asked if the groups on the island committed sabotage, and
Mr. FitzGerald said the policy presently precluded major sabotage operations
and limited it to "subtle sabotage". Mr. Murphy asked what constituted
"subtle sabotage", and Mr. FitzGerald described it as tying a rock to a wire
and throwing it across high tension lines.
-7-
13-00000
11. The Board then