14-50000
104-10174-10065
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
NATERIAL DEVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAY HENDERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: LOGANCY, KHENTIN SENGEYEVICH.
201-285418
VOL. TIL
INCLUSIVE DATES:
1
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROON:
DELETIONS, IF ANY: THIRD AGENCY DOCUMENTS
DATE
DATE
RECEIVED RETURNED
10:00 EST
28 JULY 78
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME)
SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
10:55 JIM KELLY.
Jam Kelly
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR RENOVED FROM THIS FILE
14-00000
2
•
Dup-
MATERIAL ELVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAF HENDERS
FILE TITLE/NUNDER/VOLUSIE: LOCANDY, KHLENTIN SENGEYEVICH
201-285418
VOL. TIL
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
THIRD AGENCY DOCUMENTS
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME)
SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIATE
10:5
JIM KELLY
Jaul Kally
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR RENOVED FROM THIS FILE
201-2854
14-00000
3
Joey Count
Soft
ン
SECRET
22 July 1969
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, SB
VIA
: Chief of Station
SUBJECT
:
Celebration of Polish National Day,
22 July 1969
1. The undersigned attended the celebration of the
Polish national day at the Polish Residence on Insurgentes
Sur on 22 July 1969. The following points were the most
significant:
a. The only Soviet the undersigned could
identify was Col. Konstantin Nikandrovich BOGATYREV,
the Soviet Military Attache. Someone the under-
signed's wife talked to mentioned the presence of
the Soviet Consul, but this certainly was neither
Valentin LOGINOV nor Yuriy CHERNYSII, and the
undersigned did not meet that person.
b. Whether the Cubans were invited or not,
they were not in attendance.
c. Jiri SVESTKA, of the Czech Embassy, was
there. Per SB Section briefing, the undersigned
mentioned his departure and told SVESTKA that at
least he would remain in Mexico. SVESTKA said that
this would not be the case, that he is scheduled
to leave within 15 days for Czechoslovakia. The
undersigned then mentioned a conversation with his
Czech friend in which the latter told him that he
expected to stay in Mexico for quite a while longer.
SVESTKA denied ever having said this, pointing
out that he was glad to return home. The under-
signed made no further comments.
SECRET
P-11712
14-00000
SECRET
-2
d. The ex-Haitian Ambassador, Julio Jean
PIERRE-AUDAIN, was seen by the undersigned but
left before he could talk to him. In view of the
fact that PIERRE-AUDAIN ceased to be Ambassador
of Haiti a long time ago, the undersigned feels
that his presence at the Polish national day
celebrations has some significance. He remembers
that PIERRE-AUDAIN was also present at the cele-
bration of the Czech national day this year.
other words, the Communists have made it a point
to maintain contact with him, probably in view of
the fact that PIERRE-AUDAIN may return to Haiti if
something happens to DUVALIER and may secure a
position of some importance in his country.
In
2. The President of the Consular Association, VOURVOULIAS,
told the undersigned that he would contact LOGINOV at the
Soviet Embassy to see whether the latter would agree to a
joint celebration of both the undersigned's and LOGINOV's
departures in a party to be held for both of them at the same
time. LOGINOV is not scheduled to leave Mexico until
September 1969, a departure postponed from the original
schedule of late July or early August.
Distribution:
Orig-7 (Consular Corps)
1-P-11712 (LOGINOV)
1 -P-7111 (SVESTKA)
1-P-5407 (PIERRE-AUDAIN)
RAF: 1mp
Raymond A. FRADYER
SECRET
14-00000
5
SECRET
22 July 1939
MEMORANDCH FOR: Chief, SB
VIA
SUBJECT
: Chief of Station
:
Celebration of Polish National Day,
22 July 1969
1. The undersigned attended the celebration of the
Polish national day at the Polish Residence on Insurgentes
Sur on 22 July 1969. The following points were the most
significant:
a. The only Soviet the undersigned could
identify was Col. Konstantin Nikandrovich BOGATYREV,
the Soviet Military Attache. Someone the under-
signed's wife talked to mentioned the presence of
the Soviet Consul, but this certainly was neither
Valentin LOGINOV nor Yuriy CHERNYSH, and the
undersigned did not meet that person.
b. Whether the Cubans were invited or not,
they were not in attendance.
c. Jiri SVESTKA, of the Czech Embassy, was
there. Per SB Section briefing, the undersigned
mentioned his departure and told SVESTKA that at
least he would remain in Mexico. SVESTKA said that
this would not be the case, that he is scheduled
to leave within 15 days for Czechoslovakia. The
undersigned then mentioned a conversation with his
Czech friend in which the latter told him that he
expected to stay in Mexico for quite a while longer.
SVESTKA dented ever having said this, pointing
out that he was glad to return home. The under-
signed made no further comments.
:
SECRET
14-00000
6
SECRET
-2-
d. The ex-Haitian Ambassador, Juito Jean
PIERRE-AUDAIN, was seen by the undersigned but
left before he could talk to bia, in view of the
fact that PIERRE-AUDAIN ceased to be Ambassador
of Haiti a long time ago, the undersigned feels
that his presence at the Polish national day
celebrations has some significance. He remembers
that PIERRE-AUDAIN was also present at the cele-
bration of the Czech national day this year.
other words, the Communists have made it a point
to maintain contact with him, probably in view of
the fact that PIERRE-AUDAIN may return to Haiti if
something happens to DUVALIER and may secure a
position of some importance in his country.
In
2. The President of the Consular Association, VOURVOULIAS,
told the undersigned that he would contact LOGINOV at the
Soviet Embassy to see whether the latter would agree to a
joint celebration of both the undersigned's and LOGINOV's
departures in a party to be held for both of them at the same
time. LOGINOV is not scheduled to leave Mexico until
September 1969, a departure postponed from the original
schedule of late July or early August.
Raysood A. FRADYER
Distribution:
Orig - 7 (Consular Corps)
1-P-11712 (LOGINOV)
1 -
P-7111 (SVESTKA)
1-P-5407 (PIERRE-AUDAIN)
RAF: Imp
SECRET
14-00000
7
July 16, 1969
fot auf
SD/Sie - Cialis fo hagen
SB
Contact Report
Subject: LIOAI-1 (R-9903)
Date of pect: July 17 at Hoyo 19 at 1430 hre
1.
Ereerranged meet which lasted 90 sinutes.
Next reet: Lurt 17 at the same place.
2.
to L-1 and 1-1 stated
On Friday July 11 ICON-1 jave a regular language class
I-1 stated his interest to reet the for girl at 15400-
house. In the course of conv 1-1 explained to BD-1 he believed
this was importent to his or in other words he gave him the cover story
about which we spoke at our previous reet.
-1 esired 1-1 that
:
ke would bring the for girl (Alle FOWA) to his house.
3.
On July 16 at 1000 hrs, i.e. et their next class IICCE-l told
L-1 that the gate to the Sov Anh to visit focior and he found him
thie time. In the course of copy with 10m he (LISACON-2) told his about
meeting Alle and his plans to invite rer to his home and show her arcand.
LOG told him that Alla was his recretary cai that he should not dare to
get close to her.
4.
Iil felt derested with this development, because he believed that
he was on the way/developing warideveloping womething for us. I told 1-1 that there wee
no reason of feeling bad about this fact, especially, because LOG was
leaving relatively coon and the girl momid remein here.
5.
ハーフムたん
- told me that only 11 shuncha had taken an old
in which there was an advericire neminorgia is a set 100 e
home the age-re to ne meeted to jebe
10 hecere very angry about the fect "that internationel figures are
used for cheap air. 1-1 carrected at tad are fren There
ン
mee: of..
14-00000
B
STSTH S
P-2
RIGINS SECCET
Meso for the Records
SUBJECTI Firat Sistone and
Gritheir sing to SISTONE)
Lerlem Cover Job Outing with Consular Corpst
Brief Initial Exposure to Soviets Loginor and Gelou You
1. Terence D. Sistone and Feralim
both under Consular cover,
accompanied (with wives) Fralyer on an outing of the "Cuerpo Consular
en Mexico", a social club open to all consular officers fregardless of
nationality) to new Ford factory in Cuautitlan, lunch and excusion of
Span. col. Convent at Tepotzotian from1100 to 1900hrs. on 17 July 1969.
Consular Corrs is creature of Aner, cit and ex-Consul Gen. of Greece,
Leander F. Vourvoulias, who led excursion. In addition to helping the two
new Sta. officers work into consular cover and make contacts, the purpose
of the outing in part was to see at first hand the Sov, Bloc and Cubans whe
belong to the CC. Three Sovs shovel, no identifici Bloc and no Cubs.
No other particularly interesting cous, types but door opened to meet
YAN
people at future CC meets.and
:
2. Three Sors who shoed wero Valentin Loginow, well-known to Sta.
as KGB uuter cons. cover, and two men of Commercial Sec. of Sov. Eub.
Both Sistone and Farelem independently identified Ler Nhelayevich Gulenzev
taked as he tagged along. Golon zw
church
vas also
as one of two comercial types from aug book-were unable identify the other,
who was quiet and hardly taked
quiet but was engaged twice by Sistone in conversation. Ons one occasion G
said he had been in Mexico short time, was there as result recent Sov-Hex
trade aggreement, just hapened to be around and invited with colleague
to Forl outing. On other occasion said Trotzotlan/golf leaf and genetal
art gore ornate aul iaressive than Byzantine church-aonudents he familiar
with in Moscov. spoke Span with heavy ascent and liin't talk auch but vas
quite flient nevertheless. Siilial Sistone also takel briefly to Loginor and
introduced by Fralyer as Fralyer replacedent. However conversation i noucuous
and uninteresting compared to constant verbal starring betw. Fradyer and Loginov
which Sistone will defer to Fralyer to report if he sees fit.
SECRET
(P-11712)
14-00000
9
elen que
-:
SB
fre
Meeting of cuirpo Consular de Mexico, 17 July 19 11/8e:-
KEMO FOR THE RECORD
SUS
FR
GA FERMEN
1. On 17 July 69 FL and wife attended their first
Consular Corps mäeting with two other station Officers and
wives FLE! was introduced to Lev GOLOVECY, 201-850177,P-13,766
and Valentin LOGINOV, 201-255412,P-11712 of the Soviet Embassy
and to another Russian, unidentified, who appeared very reluctant
:
apngared
to talk. GOLOVZOV was very civil but a bit less expansive than
his colleague, LOGINOV, who engaged in a constant verbal bantering
with FRADYER, LOGICY and may have established a solid rapport
which enables them to engage in the aforementioned antics without
reper repercussions. LOGO as accompanied by his wife, a very
charming, quite women, who speaks acceptable spanish. She minifested
:
a real interest in the chemical department of the plant, to the point
of explaining certain charts and symbols to LOGINOV. She probably
has had some chemical trai ing. LOGIKOV himself appeared self-assured,
sophisticated and able. He appeared not the slightest concerned
over the verbel battle
tab, and hold his cum during the
axolos. Pe looks someng
testly, spesially is hands, teh
:
came the smile. י ל : during the b
........
Sistone
cambend,
::
FILE: P-13,766
11,712
14-000-10
10
2.
2. GOLOVACY Was, as previously t'ted, more reserved. He stayed
in the background and accompained the unidentified Cussian during most.
of the tour. SRL: was introduced to him but little conversation
passed between them. He appeared a little stiff, more the Russian
sterootype of the reserved, social-ill-at-case persen. But this
was just an impression as FURALE had noz chance for an indepth
conversation. GOLOVIOV seemed to possess decent spanish. He stated
he was from the comercial section. Hopefully subject will attend
other Corps meetings and Fine: will have an opportunity to speak
to him at greater length.
17 Female
NGA FERALEZ
14-00000
sippikses
08-13
REWNO SECCET
Memo for the Records
SURLECT
First Siatore end
Feralem
(returring to SISTONE)
Cover Job Outing with Consular Corpet
Brief Initial Exposure to Soviets Loginor and Gelou τον
:
1. Terence D. Sistone and Feralem
both under Consular cover,
accompanied (with wives) Fradyer on an outing of the "Cuero Consular
en Mexico", a social club open to all consular officers (regardless of
nationality) to new Ford factory in Cuautitlan, luuch and excusion of
Span. col. Convent at Tepotzotlan from1100 to 1000hrs. ou 17 July 1969.
Consular Corps is creature of Amer. cit and ex-Consul Gen. of Greece,
Leander r. Vourvoulias, who led excursion. In addition to helping the two
new Sta. officers work into consular cover anil make contacts, the purpose
of the outing in part was to see at first hand the Sov, Bloc end Cubana vho
belong to the CC. Three Sove shoved, no identified Bloc and no Cubs. Ithak
No other particularly interesting cons, types out door opened to meet
people at future CC meets.nad
:-
2. Three Sovs who shoed ware Valentin Loginov, well-known to Sta.
as XGB under cons. cover, and two men of Commercial Sec. of Sov. Enb.
Both Sistone and Farelem independently identified Lev Nikolayeurh Golouzev
as one of two commercial types from mug book-vere unable identify the other,
who was quiet and hardly taked as he tagged along. Golon την was also
quiet but was engaged twice by Sistone in conversation. In one occasion G
said he had been in Mexico short time, was there as result recent Sov-Mex
trade aggreement, just happened to be around and invited with colleague
to Ford cuting. On other occasion G said trotzotlan/ teat ant genetal
church
art more ornate and in ressive than Byzantine church-monuments he familiar
with in Coscow. spoke Span, with heavy accent aul lidn't talk much but was.
quite flaent nevertheless, talaal Sistone also takel briefly to Loginoy and
introduced by Fralyer as Fralyer replacement. However conversation inoucuous
and uninteresting compared to constant verbal sparring dete. Fradyer and Loginov
which Siatone will defer to Fralyer to report if he sees f
SECRET
16 17 July 67
P-117/2
14-00000
13
P-11.712
Contact Report
Subject: LIRAGON-1 (74805)
July 10, 1959
Date of Moet, July 9 st Fårense Restaurant-Bar (Newton) at 1650
1.
Prearranged meet; L-l came on times the meet lasted 2 hours
and 30 minutes.
2.
Next meet: Wed July 16 at 1650 at pick up place in Bacobedo
with Gutenberg
On July 9 at 0915 hrs L-l went to the Bov Babassy to look for
LOGINOV (P-11,712). Α. 8ov girly receptionist told him that LOG was not
in and told him that he could wait in the reception roon or wait for
him in the waiting room of LOGS office. L-l prefered to remain with the
receptioniet(girl). He left after 55 minutes without seeing LOG.
When L-l came to the receptionist and asked for LOG she in
turn asked him wae he not L-l (by first name only), son of their language
teacher. L-l answered affirmatively and in turn asked her what was he
name and how does she know him. She stated that her name was Alla LNU
and that she recognised L-l by his voice from calling for LOG. (NOER: 1-1
feels positive that at least 4 months have passed since a woman answered
the phone when he asked for LOG).
4.
In the beginning of of the conv L-l found out that the girl was
from Monow which certainly pleased L-l because he had what to talk about.
She complimented L-l for speaking Russian without an accent, which was
not the case with L-18 mother, the language teacher at the Sov And.
5.
Results of this conversations
a. Alla LNU is in Mexico city less than a year. She is
bored to death here and is looking forward to returning
to Moscow as soon as she will be allowed.
b. She said that Mexico had a pleasant climate, but all
she knows about Mexico ie Ouautla and even when she
is invited there she has no company of her own (sic).
e. With regard to her schooling: after she finished
14-00000
14
-2-
high school she went to a school for mechanical tech-
nicians where she studied about a year and gave it up
because she did not like it. She competed to enter the
school of modern languages at the university but she
failed. Then, she entered the M.I.M.C. (L-l does not
know what it stands for ) and after 5 monthe she had
to go to Mexico.
d.Lol told her that he would look her up occasinally
and she appeared to be pleased with the idea.
e. Description: apparent age 25 - 26; hight about 5 ft
3 in (possibly less); hair light brown; very nice eyes
(L-l does not remember the color ); buildt rather
stout, face rather long; in general: pleasant appear
ance.
Before leaving L-l left with her a note for LOG in which he
stated that he can still be reached at the Institute between 1500 and 1600
hrs and at home and added his phone numbers and concluded that if he
did not hear from LOG it would prove he had a friend who turned out to
be no good.
7.
During L-le waiting in the reception room Yuriy OHERNISH passed
by and they exchanged few unconsequential wurde, L-l asked YO did he
give LOG the message he sent to LOG from that party (at Andreas OACANO )
and he said that he did it with pleasure and added few words of his own.
When YO left L-l asked Alla when was LOG leaving and she said LOG would
leave in October '69.
8.
At 1510 hrs of the same day LOG phoned to L-l in the Institute
and after some verbage they agreed to meet on Monday July 14 at the
Karinera restaurant at 1300 hrs (AV Chapultepec with or near Liverpool).
Both of them stated that they would be there without fail.
-
9.
With regard to the meet LOC
L-1 I repeated my previous in-
struction to L-l concerning his attitude if LOG comes out again with
the request to meet LIOVAL-1.
10.
With regard to L-ls acquaintance with Alla I suggested L-l to
ask his mother about her. There in a possibility of finding cut her full
14-00000
15
-3-
name and whether she is married or not. L-l should also mention to GOG
the fact that he met Alla while waiting for him. Depending on the find-
ings L-l should consider inviting Alla to his house for lunch one Sat
or Sun and take her with his wife and child to the Parque Asturiano to
spend the afternoon. I told L-l that I would pay for the expenses for
lunch and possible entertainment. L-l will discuss the matter with me
before doing anything.
11.
L-l reported that he had a 90 minutes talk with Karel WENDEL
(see attachment) and I debriefed him on the same. There were very few
facts which were not covered in the previous report on WENIBL.
12.
As it became obvious that the working part of the meet was over
L-l stated that he would really feel bad and blow off his top is if he
did not see XARTASUK until the end of the month. I told him that KARTASTY
had put long period of work in the States and consequently his leave was
extended for the same amount of time and I can spend that time where he
pleased. L-l commented that in that case he would extend the deadline of
becoming nasty to Aug 20. I laughed. L-1 commented that probably I was
not able to understand how much he was attached to KARCASUX.
FiFernald
14-00000
16.
July 9, 1969
Contest Repert
:
Subject: Jimmy SACRI P-13,830
Date of meet: July 7 in Subjects car and Insurgentes Samborne Far
1.
A meet was prearranged with Subject for July 7 at Del
Paseo at 1400 hrs. Subject phoned to our office in the course of the
morning to 32 confirm the arrangement. ( FERNALD was trying to reach
Subject to change the place of meet, but he was not able to reach him),
Subject did not show up at the Del Paseo and after waiting 40 minutes
F went home (his office ). At 1535 hrs F was infoed by the office
that Subject called several times and his latest statement was that he
would be in front of the Cine Catino (across the Reforma from our
Embassy). I came there on time but Subject was not around. Due to
heavy rain ? was bound to stay there and at 1630 hrs Subject showed
up in an impressive Fontiac Foneville, blue with light top, plates
(black). Subject waved to F to get in the
MBD 755 Texas, Hemisfair (black).
✓ car.
Lequestiny
Friday July 11
Il at Bone parte at nocchis
Next meet: Frida
In the car Subject stated to 3 that he goofed, because he
مه
Khcheot to the restaurant where we met twice previously and after some
6/F.
waiting and phoning he looked at his notebook and realized that he
was at the wrong place. He apologized. Then, Subject stated that he
had to return the Boneville and take another car and he asked ? to
have a ride with him. Subject took the car to Leibnitz and perked it
in front of the ant building at 297. He excused himself for few minutes
took newspapers,zxt a scall bumile and 2 miniature bottles of some
liquor and entered the ept. About 5 minutes later he returned and
we entered an old, beaten up Valient without license plates and the
e is hard to tell.
During the first ride Subject tolf that LOG phoned him
on Friday Joly & and told him that they would have to postponed their
teat acheduled for the next day because he (103) would be out of
town on Sat and Sun. 3 wanted to meet with Subject on con or Jue
P-11, 710
14-00000
17
SHIF
chinot for
Cul
Νο με
-2-
and Subject told him that he would be taken and working with 2
American businessmen who would arrive on Sunday. Subject added that
they would bring a tennis hat for 10 (they did). LOG said that us
would want to visit Josephine CAVACA, probably on Thursday July 10,
but would phone him to arrange for a meet before coming to his (and
Josephices) ept. LOG also recinded Subject & to prepare him for
that meet a written report on the opinion of Mexcican government
officials about the Interamerican Sconomic Conference et Port of
Spain.
July
4. After returning from the apt Subject told F that LOG had,
phoned to Josephine end told her that he would visit them on Thur
a little after 2000 hrs and that he would bring to Josephine 2 bottles
Votka.
5.
Then, Subject asked F when should he arrange for a meet
with LCG, because in front of Josephine they do not speak about
politics. F told Subject that the logical thing to do would be to
take advantage of the social gathering" with LOG to make arrangements
for their next meet. Subject agreed and asked whether our security
people decided to give or not to give the directory to him for
passing it LOG. F told Subject that he messed the matter by bringing
into the picture a nonexisting Fatricia which we were not able to
produce. Therefore, the first step is getting rid of Patricia, which
means to get to the point of Fe first instruction: Subject really
has no close friend or contact in the U.S. Embassy and is willing
to develop one if LOG insists on getting the directory: Subject is
willing to follow LOGs instruction regarding how to go about it.
With regard to "Fatricia" Subject will have to state that she did not
return from her leave and he does not know why.
6.
At that point xa Subject and i were alrady at the Diana
Circle and Subject suggested that they stop for a drink in Insugentes
at Saaberas which is only a couple of blocks from his office and ?
agreed. They remained there about 50 minutes.
7.
Subject stated that the directory has become a problem.
14-00000
18
-3-
commented that the existing problem was created by Subject and his
not colpiance with the instruction; the only way out of it now is
to do what ? told him in the car.
8.
In reply to Fe question Subject stated that the 2 Americane
who arrived here on Sunday July 6 were interested in investing capital
in a guineser a housing project for people of low income. He added
that one of them is owner of a mining corporation and the otherone
is from the Beneficiary (if rembered correctly) Insurance Co. Fe
belives that they were satisfied with the findingsm but it will take
about a month before the deal materialices, because the approval of
appropriate board was needed.
9.
Subject showed to Fa calling card of Ir. C. Lester McGee
Cation (or MacGee), President of Moon Valley Mining Corporation,
frees 3113 Oakland Ave (or Street). Dallas, Texas. There were at least
No Tisces two other addresses listed which F did not remember. Subject went
atall on to say that Fr. Nachee was interested in buying platinum, but
Subject told him that Mexico had no platinum and that once the Sovy
were trying to sella quantity in Mexico. Mr. MacGee told Subject
to look into the patter and explained him the mechanics of the deal.
Sove would have to make a firm offer to a Swiss Company which is
controlled by a Canadian company which is in fact a subsidiary of
an American company: ultimate destination of the platinum is the
U.S. Reportedly, the deal is all the way through a clean legal
commercial transaction and terms of payment would be Irrevocable,
Confirmed Letter of Credit, cash on delivery in Switzerland. The
intial purchase would be 5,000 ounces but there is will to buy up.
should he
to 1 cillion collars worth of platinum. Subject askel
ask LCG are the Sovs interested in the deal.
10.
F told Subject he should tell about it to LOC if there is
a commission for the person who facilitates the deal. According to
Subject there is a CS31.- Commission per ounce if he can provide
the goode. F told Subject de should express the desire that LOG
obtain the info kiaself and if the answer is favorable and the price
right then I can introduce Subject to the Sov official who will
14-00000
19
SECRET
be authorized to close the deal. Subject agreed to emphasize the
attractiveness of the comission end the advantage of the fact that
the deel is handled in Switzerland and consequently the commission
is also paid there. Fold Subject that he wanted to know in detail
LOGS reaction concerning the commission. Subject should also play
around with the theme that it would be adeal if LOC could travel to
Switzerland to introduce him to the right person (Sov) and similar.
11. Subject commented that the buyer is serious and it remains to
be seen are the Sov willing to sell at a convenient for them but still
fair price. Subject went on to say that if the deal was to go well
he would have to go to Switzerland, and this arizes another problem,
i.e. how long would it take for him to get American Passport, because
he id presently documented by his Birth Certificate. F told him
to start thinking about passing thet bridge when he comes to it.
12. Subject appeared to be satisfied with Fs attitude in the above
conversation and he commented that with this matter showing up plus
the tennis hat and the written report there should be enough for a meet
with LOG. F told Subject that he wanted a carbon copy of the report
he would hand to LOG and Subject precise to make one...
13.
Then, Subject observed that in order to place the business
4
talk with LOG in the right prospective he would have to see LOG before
Er. LeGee and his companion leave, which means the latest on "ed noon.
F. told him to go ahend and make arrangements which would be normal
if he was trying to push the platinum deel, but if he gets to see
LOG before Thur at his (Josephines) apt, he should advise 7 by phone,
i.e. leave a message for F to ring him up.
14.
Comment by Fernald:
b. Even if nothing comes out of the platinus deal,
which is quite likely, conversation about it
and the asscciated commission, should give us
some reading on LOG on one hand and on the other
shed more light ca the personal relation between
Subject and 10.
b. The so call- social relation between Corephine
and 100 is interim, to say the least.
Seruel
14-00000
20
ATTACHMENT
July 9, 1969
Subject: Valentin LOGINOV (P-11,712)
Source: Jimmy SABORI
1.
According to Source LOGINOV phoned him on Friday July 4 at 1100
hrs and told that he would be out of town on July 5 and 6 and,
consequently, would want to reschedule rescheduled their meet. Lo proposed
Monday or Tuesday and Source told him that he would be busy wt with
acme American businesemen LOG concluded that he wanted to visit
Josephine ALCAYAGA Segues fett week and will do it probably on
Thursday (July 10), but will phone earlier.
2.
According to Source LOG does not miss a week to give a
ring to Josephine ALOAYAGA just to say Hello.
3.
During the phone conversation mentioned in para Ll above
LOG reminded Source that he was interested in having next week in
writing what Mexican officials thought about the American promises
made at the Interamerican Economic Conference in Port of Spain.
The following are LOG's statements made to Source some of their
previous meets:
a. LOG has a Life Insurance for 1 million Pesos
with Monterrey Comania de Seguros, S.A. in
Mexico City.
b. LOG told Source that it was good to have a friend
"on the other side", meaning American side, because
one can never tell what might happen.
Prays int hazing mirney of his own.
FHFernald
14-00000
21
Aflas
Contact Report
Sothap
SB/S
Subject: LELACU-1 (1-4305)
July 5, 1969
Date of Meet: July 2 at Paris-Hexico Restaurant at 1640 hrs..
1.
:
Prearranged acet to which Subject came on time and seeing
me he drove around several blocks and returned to the prearranged
place 6 minutes later.
2.
I paid L-1
liext meet:
1,000 salary for June 169.
July 9 with the pick up at the same place at
1615 hrs.
L-1 told me about the evening he spend with LIOVAL-1 at the
Sov show. He reported the matter exactly as LIOVAL-1 did and added that
in spite of his intention to meet with some members of the Sov group
he did not find time to do it.
3.
With regard to the visit he promised to make to LOCINOV
L- stated that he was not able to make up his mind in doing it,
because he feared that LOS might suspect him for showing so much
interest in him now and previously he was avoiding him. I repeated
my request that he go and see LOGINOT before we meet next week. He
said he would do it on Friday July 4 at 1015 hrs.
:
I told L-l that I wanted him to