1104-10064-10012
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
PROCESSING ACTION
L
MAPYED FOR MEETING
TO
Chief, Sov Bloc Div; Chief, Far East Division X
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
INFO.
Chief, WOMUSE/ICG
ONLY QUALIFIED DESX
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
FROM
Chief of Station, Tokyo
SUBJECT
Tokyof
MICROFILM
RYBAT MIPASHA REDTOP - Beheiren and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
ACTION REQUIRED. REFERENCES
TOKYO 7263
As noted in reference, forwarded herewith is a copy of the sub-
ject memorandum. Please note that the information in the memorandum
Paragraph B. 4. b) is particularly sensitive and should only be
given properly restricted dissemination.
waiki
Mark J. LIDGERWOOL
ATTACHMENT
Memo dtd 27 Nov 67
Distribution
1
- C/SB Div w/lcy attach
C/FE w/l cy attach
-
1- C/WOMUSE/ICG w/l attach
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CLASSIFICATION REVIEW
Conducted Da 16-10-76
E42 APDET CL BY060595
CS COPY
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
FJTA-53626
CLASSIFICATION
8603
DATE
ciassitostien
DEC 6 1967
HOS FILE NUMBER
SEURE TRYBA UNKNOWN
14-00000
SECRE
27 November 1967
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT: BEHEIREN and the Four U.S. Navy Deserters
A. Origin and Development of BEHEIREN.
1. Founding: BEHEIREN (Japan "Peace for Vietnam" Com-
mittee) was organized in April 1965, nominally as a politically
Independent group of intellectuals and cultured persons whose
purpose was "to help restore peace in Vietnam." Actually, it
is a loosely organized group of ex-JCP members, progressive
intellectuals, leftist cultured persons, and leftwing students
banded together in the name of opposition to the Vietnam war
-
by two common denominators, dedicated anti-Americanism and
refusal to be dominated or controlled by the orthodox Japan
Communist Party.
2. Hard-Core Secretariat: The real force behind the
organization of BEHEIREN, right from the beginning to the
present, has been a brilliant Communist named YOSHIKAWA
Yuichi, whose conspiratorial organizational skills have
been perhaps the most indispensible ingredients in BEREIREN'S
development. YOSHIKAWA was expelled from Tokyo University
for his role as a ZENGAKUREN leader in the 1960 U.S./Japan
Security Treaty riots. He then went into fulltime JCP mass
movement professional work, becoming the Secretariat official
in charge of international relations for the Japan Peace
Committee. YOSHIKAWA broke with the JCP in late 1964,
following the rupture in relations between the JCP and CPSU
in May that year. The inspiration for BEHEIREN springs in
large measure from YOSHIKAWA's personal desire to use his
organizational talents in countering the JCP and its Japan
Peace Committee. YOSHIKAWA, in addition to being a well
qualified English linguist himself, years ago surrounded
himself with a small following of similarly qualified
licutenants, whom he brought along into BEREIREN to give
hin the necessary depth and experience to run this new
organization. YOSHIKAWA functions as BEHEIREN's Secretary
General.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
3. Respectable Intellectual Front: Following funda-
mental Communist principles for mass movement work (better
than the JCP itself follows these tenets), the ex-JCP
organizers of BEHEIREN kept themselves in the background
and lined up a number of prominent Japanese progressive
intellectuals and leftist cultured persons to front for
BEHEIREN. The choice of ODA Makoto, ex-Fulbrighter and
popular young novelist, to be the chief front man - Chair-
man - was an extremely lucky stroke for BEHEIREN. ODA has
taken to this grand-standing, front work like a duck to
water. It has given him a chance to give unbridled vent to
his own latent anti-American foolings, puffed him up to the
extent that he has been dubbed "the emperor" by other BEHEIREN
activists, and given him at long last an ideological mission
to pursue. YOSHIKAWA has performed magnificently in feeding
ODA's ego needs and in infusing and indoctrinating ODA so
that his words and actions take on sufficiently virulent
anti-American overtones. ODA has served another vital
function for BEHEIREN by recruiting a sizeable number of
fellow intellectuals to join the ranks of BEREIREN activists.
(Attachment 1 is a listing of a number of those Japanese who
have been identified as active BEHEIREN supporters or sympa-
thizers.)
4. Organizational Development: In its 2 1/2 year history,
BEHEIREN has not appreciably changed its organizational format,
although it has moved its office three times and modified its
name even oftener. PEHEIREN is not a "mass organization", be-
cause it has had no sizeable popular backing to the present
time. Its hard core, secretariat organization is run by
YOSHIKAWA and his lieutenants. Its public image, intellectual
front is led by ODA, and given body by a score of like-minded
intellectual friends of ODA and YOSHIKAWA, who form the loose
body of BEHEIREN's activist Icadership. Under this ΒΕΠΕΙΡΕΝ
leadership superstructure lies a paltry base of only several
hundred BEHEIREN "rank-and-file" supporters, mostly young
Japanese students. Organizationally, EEHEIREN has no formal
membership system, so its base of supporters is fluid and not
precisely measurable. However, the base support for BEHEIREN
has definitely been on the upswing during 1967, and made such
notable strides during the past summer that JCP Headquarters
officials finally felt constrained to note with concern that
BEHEIREN was beginning to drain off a growing number of pro-
gressive youth who otherwise would have been absorbed into
the JCP's own youth movement. BEREIREN leaders have tried to
help this growth along by setting up a youth section, calling
it "Young BEHEIREN." BEHEIREN's imaginative actions and
publicity-conscious programs have been responsible for its
recent growth, and this period of growth seems to be now on
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
-3
the verge of really picking up speed and momentum. As a result
of its role in the case of the four deserting sailors, BEREIREN
has reaped bountiful publicity, has succeeded in touching a
delicate Japanese public nerve of sympathy and pacifism, open-
ing a floodgate of support for BEHEIREN from all over Japan.
When this case fades from the limelight, it is still most
likely that a fair percentage of current wave of popular
support for BEHEIREN will solidify into permanent mass backing,
giving BEHEIREN, for the first time, a meaningful base to
support its future activities,
:
5. Activities and Accomplishments: BEHEIREN has engaged
in a number of propaganda actions, and participated in inter-
national anti-Vietnam War activities. It has tried to co-
operate with certain front activities in Japan controlled by
the JCP, most notably the Japan Committee to Investigate War
Crimes in Vietnam activities, which culminated in the Tokyo
Court of last August, but has been soundly and rudely rebuffed
by the JCP. In spite of this, BEHEIREN has churned along at
its own pace, with a continuing series of anti-Vietnam war
actions, most of them related in some way to the American
pacifist movement. In this regard, BEHEIREN has succeeded in
cornering a virtual monopoly on Japanese contacts with the U.S.
pacifist movements, and has effectually capitalized on this to
promote its own action program. The case of the four deserting
sailors, while an apparent lucky windfall for BEHEIREN, only
points up the fact that BEHEIREN, through past organizational
work and promotional activities, was "johnny-on-the-spot",
ready and capable (unique in Japan in this regard) to take
the ball and run with it. BEMEIREN ran all the way in this
case and scored its most notable success since it was organized.
(Attachment 2 is a listing of BEHEIREN's more notable activities
since its founding. Attachment 3 is a partial listing of
American and other foreign persons known to have been in
contact with or cooperated with BEHEIREN.)
B. The Case of the Four Sailor Deserters and BEHEIREN.
indicates that the
went AWOL, and ended
Precisely what personal
1. How It Started: The consensus of all available overt
medin material, with no recorded dissent,
four sailors voluntarily left their ship,
up wallowing around Tokyo's hippie-land.
grievances prompted the four to embark on this mis-adventure is
not yet known. But, up to this point, the four could fairly be
categorized as misguided youngsters, gone astray in a foreign
land, and due to get slapped back in line with traditional
Navy justice when they finally decided to stop the fun and go
back to the ship. So far, this made their cases far from
unique.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
2. How It Became an Incident: "But instead of returning to
their ship of their own volition or being apprehended by the
Shore Patrol, the four made contact with BEHEIREN leaders.
Acsin, press reports indicate that this was just a coincidence,
that there was no pre-planning by the four to contact EEHEIREN.
There are no available overt nor covert reports that indicate
otherwise. But, once the BEHEIREN people made contact, they
recognized the potential immediately and moved fast for the
kill. (Attachment 4 is a Yomiuri Newspaper clipping, 22 Nov-
ember 1967, that is both a representative and comprehensive
account of this phase of the case. Even if this article
should contain some minor inaccuracies, the basic line seems
factual and has not been challenged elsewhere.)
3. BEHEIREN Takes Over: When the four made contact with
EEHEIREN, it suddenly became an entirely different ballgame.
BEHEIREN had everything needed to capitalize on this: veteran
activist leaders who are experienced enough to recognize the
windfall that had come their way; an apparatus that could
provide hiding places for the four; long standing liaison
contacts with Soviet Embassy officials for use in planning
exit from Japan; solid contacts with reliable American
pacifists with whom the bona fides of the four sailors could
be checked; money and organization to capitalize on the
propaganda potential (such as preparing a movie film for the
initial BEHEIREN press conference announcing the desertion,
prepared more likely than not by BEHEIREN stalwart EUEQ
Keinosuke, an independent film producer) and English speaking
activists capable of sympathizing, encouraging, soothing, or
agitating the four young sailors, so that there would be no
turning back.
4. The BEHEIREN Apparatus At Work: While many of the
small pieces of this puzzle, which would put the whole case in
proper detailed chronological order and eliminate speculation
on minor points, are still missing, enough is known now,
through overt and covert sources, that the picture of BEHEIREN'S
adept handling of this case shines through clearly. The follow-
ing elements, all part of the BEHEIREN apparatus, make up the
bulk of the picture:
a) Hide-out: When EEHEIREN got hold of the four on
about 26 October, they had to be hiden out for the approximate
two week period until their exit from Japan could be arranged.
This presented BEHEIREN no great logistical problem. A number
of the BEREIREN activist leaders have homes well suited to
harboring fugitives. For example, BEHEIREN activist leader
FUKASAKU Mitsusada has a villa hidden away in Chigasaki, which
was used on the night of 12 September for a meeting of about
20 top BEHEIREN leaders, and which would be highly suitable
SECRET
14-00000
:
-5-
for hiding the four deserters. Other private-dwellings, be-
longing to BEHEIREN leaders and loyal supporters, are scattered
throughout both the Kanto and Kansai areas.
b) BELEIREN/Soviet Liaison: EEDEIREN Secretary General
YOSHIKAWA has maintained periodic contact with Soviet Embassy
officials for years. BEFEIREN Chairman ODA has met Soviet
Peace Committee officials in Moscow. The exact means of how
this liaison was accomplished in this case is precisely known
from a covert phone tap on the Soviet Embassy's line. A full
transcript is available of two phone calls made on 30 October,
first by Brian Victoria to Chief Press Attache Nikolay V.
Vasilyevich, and second by YOSHIKAWA to First Secretary
Sergey D. Anisimov, urgently requesting a private meeting
later that day to discuss "an extremely important, extremely
delicate antter", without doubt the case of the four sailors.
c) BEHEIREN/U.S. Pacifist Liaison: BEHEIREN contacted
Dartmouth University professor Ernest P. Young, who flew to
Japan on & November, apparently helped BEHEIREN leaders check
out the bona fides of the deserters, and returned to the U.S.
on 11 November. (Attachment 5 is the translation of a Sankei
Shimbun article, dated 21 November, reporting an interview
with Young, giving his version of his role in this case.)
5. Escape to Moscow: The four deserters turned up in
moscow on 20 November. The press has speculated widely and
unanimously that the four left Japan on the Soviet passenger
ship Baikal on 11 November. Again, there is no dissenting
opinion, overt nor covert. The only mystery concerning this
final phase of the Japanese portion of this case concerns the
mechanics of how the four boarded the Baikal and who assisted
in this maneauver. But with the sailing of the Baikal from
Yokohama, BEHEIREN completed its most highly successful and
beautifully executed activity in its 2 1/2 year history. Not
only did BEHEIREN smear the American Government's image in
Japan, not only did BEHEIREN gain a vast amount of priceless
publicity that will swell the ranks of its supporters and be
invaluable in future activities, but BEHEIREN doubtlessly
even made a profit, financially, on this low budget operation
- donations are still pouring into BERZIREN Headquarters from
all over Japan to "help and protect U.S. deserters".
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 1.
Japanese Who Have Been Identified as
Active DEREIREN Supporters or Sympathizers
1. YOSHIKAWA Yuichi (DEHEIREN Secretary General) - former JCP
member.
+
2. ODA Makoto (BEHEIREN Chairman) - popular novelist.
3. ΚΑΙΚΟ Ken - Akutagawa prize winning novelist.
4. KUBO Keinosuke - film producer and director.
5. TSURUMI Shunsuke - Doshisha University professor.
6. TSURUMI Kazuko - sister of Shunsuke (their father is the late
philosopher, Yusuke).
7. FURUYAMA YOZO - high school teacher.
1
5.
8. MUTO Ichiyo - ex-JCP (tried to travel to U.S. to represent
BEHEIREN at October 21 demonstrations this year, but was
denied a visa to enter the U.S.)
9.. YAMADA Atsushi
ex-JCP.
10. FUKUDA Yoshiyuki - playwriter.
11. TOMINAGA Ichiro - cartoonist.
12. FUKASAKU Mitsusada - professor.
13. AWAZU Kiyoshi - graphic designer.
14. TAKADO Kanane - Christian leader.
15. YOSHIDA Kiju - film director.
16. UMINARA Shun - writer.
17. HASHIMOTO Mineo - Buddhist priest.
18. HOTTA Yoshie - novelist.
19. GOTO Hiroyuki - scientist.
30. KUWABARA Takeo - professor at Kyoto University.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
21. SAKAMOTO Yoshikazu - Assistant professor at Tokyo University.
22. HIDAKA Rokuro - professor at Tokyo University.
23. IIDA Momo - writer.
24. TSURUMI Yoshiyuki - employed at International House in Tokyo.
25. TERAN Minako
26. ΑΝΑI Fumihiko
27. NASU Masanao
28. MATSUMOTO Ichiju
29. FUKUTOWI Setsuo
30. KURIHARA Yukio
31. etc: ANDO Jimbei, CHIBA Hido, EGAWA Taku, FUJII Nittatsu,
HARIYU Ichiro, HOSHINO Yasusaburo, ICHII Saburo, IKEYAMA Juro,
ISHIDA Takeshi, KANAI Yoshiko, KASAI Seiichi, KATAGIRI Yuzuru,
KATO Shuichi, KAZAMA Michitaro, MATSUURA Sozo, KIDOKORO Masao,
KITAKOJI Satoshi, KOBAYASHI Shoichiro, KOMATSU Sakyo,
KOBAYASEI Tomi, KUNO Osamu (Shu), KURODA Hidetoshi, MARUYAMA
Masao, MIDORIKAWA Toru, MIZUSAWA Yana, MORITAKI Ichiro,
KUCHAKU Seikyo, MURAMATSU Hiro, NISHIO Noboru, NOMURA Koichi,
OGOSEI Teruo, OTSUKOTSU Yoshiko, SERIZAWA Tae, SHIRAI Shimpei,.
SHINMURA Takeshi, SHISHIDO Hiroshi, SUGIURA Mitsuo, SUGIYAMA
Tatsubaru, SUZUKI Masahira, TAKEUCHI Yoshitomo, WADA Nagahisa,
YAMADA Munenitsu, YAMADA Toshio, YAMAGUCHI Kosaku, YAMANI SHI
Eiichi, YASUDA Takeshi, YOSHINO Gonzaburo, YOSHIWARA Koichiro,
OKAMOTO Taro, MATSUMOTO Seicho, EI Rokusuke, IZUMI Taku,
AWAYA Noriko, KATO Yoshiro, SHIROYAMA Saburo, TAKAHASHI
Taketomo, ODAGIRI Hideo, OKUMA Minoru, SANO Kenji, SUZUKI
Michihiko, KUBATA Hanya, SHINOHARA Seiei, MARUYAMA Kunio,
SECRET
14-00000
SEGRET
TSURUSHIMA Sotsurei, NURO Kenji, KONAKA Yotaro, SAKAMOTO
Yoshikazu, SAITO Masahiko, etc.
COMMENT: Although not recorded here, many of the above persons
are ex-JCP members.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Attachment No. 2
Some BEHEIREN Activities and Accomplishments
1. Regular once-per-month demonstrations at a public park in
Tokyo, consisting of anti-American speeches and followed by street
marches.
2. An all night TV "teach-in" with BEHEIREN activist leadors,
along with special guest, U. S. pacifist Carl Oglesby (Chairman of
the Students for a Democratic Society.)
3. A full page advertisement in the New York Times (16 November
1965), followed by another full page ad in the Washington Fost
(3 April 1967), appealing to Americans to stop the war in Vietnam.
4. A "Meet in Conference of Two Nations for Peace in Vietnam,"
held in Tokyo in August 1966, and attended by BEHEIREN activists and
seven U.S. pacifist leaders (including Dave Dellinger), and observers
from France, England, Canada, the USSR, Pakistan, and Mongolia.
5. A mass meeting in Tokyo in October 1966, guest speakers of
which were French pacifists, Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir.
6. Nationwide tours of Japan for lectures and peace rallies for
such anti-Vietnam war pacifists as Professor Howard Zinn and the late
A. J. Nuste of the United States, Claude Bourdet of France, and Thich
Nhat Hanh of South Vietnam....
7. A mass meeting in Tokyo in January 1967, sponsored by
DEHEIREN and featuring U.S. folk singer and pacifist Joan Baez.
8. A continuing program of direct distribution of pamphlets to
U.S. troops stationed in Japan, and those coning to Japan on warships,
and for rest or hospitalization from Vietnaz.
9. Participation by two BEREIREN activist leaders (Kyoto
University professor KUWABARA Takeo and International House staffer
TSURUMI Yoshikyuki, taking advantage of a trip to the U.S. to attend
a non-political Japan-America Congress on Cultural Problems) in
anti-Vietnam war speech rallies and demonstrations at Dartmouth
University in early May 1967, followed by an unsuccessful attempt
So invite Cassius Clay to visit Japan on behalf of BEHEIREN.
10. Continuing efforts to bring to Japan for a nationwide
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
speech tour on behalf of BENEIREN, Soviet poet Yevgeni Yevtushenko,
an effort that has not yet reached fruition but is still pering
11. Participation in the Stockholm July 1967 "World Conference
on Vietnam," by sending two BENEIREN activist leaders as delegates.
12. Cooperation with the U.S. Quakers, pacifists, and Earle
Reynolds in sending the yacht "Phoenix" with medical aid, first to
Haiphong, then on a second trip in the Fall of 1967, secking but
failing to find landfall to deliver medical aid to either North or
South Vietnam.
13. Attempted, but failed due to inability to obtain U.S. visa,
to send a BEHEIREN activist leader (MUTO Ichiyo) to the U.S. to
participate in the 21 October 1967 anti-Vietnam War demonstrations.
14. Currently carrying out a fund raising campaign to send an
aid ship to North Vietnam. In this, and other activities, BEHEIREN
leaders are maintaining ever closer liaison contact with their
counterparts abroad, such as the French "Conite" Vietnam National."
In an effort to generate public support for this aid ship fund
raising campaign, BENEIREN succeeded in issuing a public appeal,
under the endorsing signatures of Tokyo Governor MINOBE Ryokichi and
Yokohama Nayor ASUKATA Ichio, as well as the usual intellectuals
supporting BELEIREN.
15. In October 1967, BEREIREN solicited approval to hold anti-
Vietnam War demonstrations in front of the U.S. Embassy in Tokyo,
expecting to be denied and then intending to make this denial a court
test case. Instead, SEHEIREN was given this permission, and conducted
two crderly and well-publicized demonstrations in front of the American
Embassy, garuering a larger public turn out of participants than in
any previous BEHEIREN-sponsored demonstration.
16. Assisted and abetted the defection to the USSR of four
American sailors from the U.S. Navy carrier Intrepid. Following this
success, BELEIREN's most effective activity to date, BEREIREN leaders
are organizing a permanent "underground railway" of Japanese intell-
ectuals who will volunteer their homes as possible "way stops" for
hiding future U.S. military deserters that BEHEIREN now hopes to
induce.
Comment: For other details, see Tokyo intelligence reporting:
FOT-11547, 31 May 1966
FJT-12046, 14 October 1966
EJT-12690, 10 May 1967
EJT-12851, 5 July 1967
FJT-13081, 8 September 1967
FJT-13154, 27 September 1967
FJT-13303, 22 November 1967
Also, OSS-6790, 11 July 1967
SECRET
14-00000
ATTACHMENT 3
SECRET
Partial Listing of American and Other Foreign
Persons Known to Have Been in Contact with or
Cooperated with BEREIREN
Americans.
1. Staughton Lynd (ez-Yale professor)
2. Norman Mailer (novelist)
3. Dave Dellinger (Editor of Liberation)
4. Howard Zinn (Boston U. professor)
5. Donald Keyes (National Committee for a Sane
Nuclear Policy)
6. David EcReynolds (Chairman, War Resisters'
League)
7. A. J. Huste (now deceased)
8. Karl Meyer
9. William Davidson
10. Bradford Lyttle
11. Charlotte Thurber
12. (Miss) Quentin Bassett (Students for a Democratic
Society)
13. Murray Levin (Boston U. professor)
14. Robert Ockene (Veterans and Reservists to End
the War in Vietnam)
15. Carl Oglesby (Chairman, Students for a Democratic
Society)
16. Barbara Deming (Associate editor of Liberation)
17. Joan Baez (folk singer)
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
2
18. Ira Morris (Paris expatriate)
19. Otto Naisan (phonetic, New York City peace activist)
20. Barbara and Earle Reynolds (divorced but separately
ective long-time residents
in Japan)
21. William R. Christensen (an American pacifist drifter,
who gave BEREIREN its first
experience in the summer of
1966 in exploiting for pro-
paganda in Japan, and then in
arranging the onward journey
of an American who wanted to
defect to the USSR)
22. Brian Victoria (head-shaved pacifist and "converted"
Buddhist priest, known to be in
regular contact with the Soviet
Embassy in Tokyo)
23. Mr. Willowby (inu, phonetic, "chief of the Quaker
Peace Action movement in the U.S")
24. An unidentified American of Japanese descent, from
Hawaii, who is currently a student at Waseda University
25. Kosaku Yamaguchi (reportedly born in U.S., present
B. Other Foreigners.
citizenship status unclear) (formerly
was a professor at Momoyama University
in Osaka, but has been teaching at the
University of California in Berkeley
for some time)
1. Hikhail Kotov, USSR (Soviet Peace Committee)
2. Claude Bourdet, France (French Committee to Support
3
the Vietnamese People)
Peggy Duff, Great Britain (Campaign for Nuclear Dis-
armament
4
James Endicott, Canada (World Peace Council)
5
Faiz Ahmed Faiz, Pakistan
6. Gabita Muslepov, USSR
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
7. Mrs. Erdenebat Ojon, Mongolia
8. Konstantin Shugnov, USSR
9. Francis Marcel Kahn, France (Comite Vietnam
National)
10. Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, France
11. Thích Nhat Hanh, South Vietnam
COMMENT: This is not, by any means, a complete listing, nor
does it necessarily list BEHEIREN's most important
activist contacts abroad. But this list is re-
presentative in showing the breadth of BEHEIREN
liaison abroad, particularly with the American
"new left".
SECRET
14-00000
ATTACHMENT. 4
THE YOMIURI
22 NOVE
Wednesday
54 US Deseriers Possibly
sec-
YUICHI YOSHIKAWA,
retary-general of the the Japan
Peace-For-Vietnam Commit
tee (Behciren), tells a press
conference Tuesday that the
four deserters of the US war
ship Intrepid hoped to stay
in Japan but the Beheiren
could not help them to do so.
Left Japan Aboard Baikal-..
The four deserters from the US aircraft carrier Intrepid who made a dramatic tele-
vision appearance Manday in Moscow are believed to have left Japan irregularly
by the Soviet-liner. Baikal which left Yokohama on November 11 for the Far East
Soviet port of Nakhodko.
Not Worried.
were practicallvi
unconcerned, Naito said..
penniless but appeared quite
to live He said the deserters ap
ters, they When he first met the deser-
Police Department sald Tues at a press conference held No
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo.
could have boarded the ship by Yoshikawa said that the de
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted
asp
Government officials.
Japanese watchmen were on
:
::
Sources in the Metropolitan test against the Vietnam war,
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo.
could have boarded the ship by Yoshikawa said that the de
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted
asp
Government officials.
Japanese watchmen were on
:
::
Sources in the Metropolitan test against the Vietnam war,
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo.
could have boarded the ship by Yoshikawa said that the de
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted
asp
Government officials.
Japanese watchmen were on
:
::
Sources in the Metropolitan test against the Vietnam war,
day that the four Americans vember 13 in Tokyo.
could have boarded the ship by Yoshikawa said that the de
a special gangway for Soviet serters first wanted
guard at at another gangway for In
ordinary passengers when 222
listed passengers, including
eight. Americans, boarded the
liner before it
hama at 11.50 am, November 11.
it departed Yoko
1
The watchmen told police
that they did not see any per
son who was not on the pas
senger list board the ship
It was learned that 17 offi
through the ordinary gangway.
cials of the Soviet Embassy and
trade mission in Tokyo and
scores of visitors boarded the
gangway.
and drink such as udon:
He said the four Americans
they could not live in Japan
Japanese police or. US military
without being "found by the
authorities sooner or later, Yo
shikawa sald.
The Beheiren told them that wanted to live in Japan, and
2
if possible in Tokyo.
Nalto and his friend. Yamao
decided to ask the help of the
Beheiren and delivered the
four men to the Beheiren
Lived Like Hippies around November 26.
of Tokyo, told The Yomiuri all the four Americans were
of Hiromi Naito. 20, a painter Naito said he believed that
Shimbun that he and his not communists and that they
friend, Sansei Yamao, a hippie had no interest in communist
poet and member of the ideology.
for the deserters and the decided to go to some neutral
Beheiren, acted as go-betweens He said the four must
Beheiren;
:
:
peacefully in Japan and asked poin parently.. enjoyed hippie life,
their English proficiency.
1. which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu.
living on cheap Japanese food;
peacefully in Japan and asked poin parently.. enjoyed hippie life,
their English proficiency.
1. which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu.
living on cheap Japanese food;
peacefully in Japan and asked poin parently.. enjoyed hippie life,
their English proficiency.
1. which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu.
living on cheap Japanese food;
peacefully in Japan and asked poin parently.. enjoyed hippie life,
their English proficiency.
1. which they could utilize (noodles) and shochu.
country via the Soviet Union
Baikal through the special
The police sources said that
it was "quite possible" that the the Naito altoura said he met two of after they learned that they
Soviet authorities in Tokyo ar Dick D. Bailey, 19, and Airman A spokesman for the Justice
deserters-Airman could not live in Japan.
ranged the deserters' exit... Mike A. Lindner, 19 at a hip- Ministry said Tuesday that
Beheiren Pledge ple. hangout in Shinjuku there
:.
Yuichi Yoshikawa, secretary general of the Japan Peace-For-
told a press. conference Tues- around October 20..
day that the committee could He said both Americans wore leather jackets and other ministrative agreement in the
not disclose how the four informal clothing which they Japan-US Security Treaty gua
Americans left because it had said they, borrowed from their rantees US military personnel
promised. not to do so. Japanese anese hippie friends hang- the right to come, to stay in
He neither affirmed nor deni- ing around the Shinjuku area. or leave Japan,
ed the report that the Amer- Bailey and Lindner and the He said he understood that
icans left Japan by the Baikal other two-Airman John M. the four Americans were tech
It was the. Beheiren 'which Barilla, 20, and Airman Ap-nically still enlisted. US mill-
announced for the first time prentice Craig W. Anderson, tary personnel.
the desertion of the four crew 20-went around in pairs, Furthermore, If their exit
members of the Intrepid to pro ma-ku, from October: 24 to 25. them, he added.
Naito said.
Lindner stay overnight at his made an official request to the
Naito said he let Bailey and was before e US authorities
house in Hayamiyacho, aters Japanese police to search for
He also said there were no
Japanese laws allowing charges
to be preferred against the
Beheiren officials and other Ja-
:panese people who "protected"
the Americans in Japan and
helped their departure to the
Soviet Union.
was nothing legally
wrong' in the four Americans
leaving Japan because the ad
==End of OCR for page 15==

14-00000
SANKEI (Full)
32
November 21, 1967
Prof. YOUNG Says Four American Deserter Seamen Not in Japan Any More
Went to Tokyo and Tried to Dissuade Them;
Probably Escaped from Japan on the 12th or the 13th
(New York, November 20, Correspondent Tadashi ONODERA) Professor
Ernest P. YOUNG of Dartmouth College in the U.S., consented to an interview
with this reporter on the question of the four American seamen who deserted
from the U.S. aircraft carrier Intrepid. At the interview held on the 19th,
Professor YOUNG clarified that the Peace for Vietnam Association (Beheiren,
with Makoto ODA acting as its representative) contacted an anti-war organiza-
tion in the U.S., and at this, Professor YOUNG hurriedly visited Tokyo, and
meeting the four seamen in a room in an apartment house in Tokyo on the 9th
and 10th, tried to persuade them to return. In regard to the pres ent where-
abouts of these four seamen, he made the noteworthy statement that "those
Efour were still in Japan, up puntil the night. night of the 1lth, when I left I left Japan,
but they are probably no longer in Japan now
Families Perplexed
じゃ
i
:
2