104-10182-10057
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME
WIROGUE
201-233477
VOL. III
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM
DELETIONS IF ANY
DATE
RECEIVED
DATE
RETURNED
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME)
SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
27 JULY 28
DAN HARDWAY.
Don
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE
14-00000
3-D-C-F-E-T
141964
DATE
RID/201
CH
Initials
The following documents have been removed from als dossier and covarded
strcato further processing:
Sent to RID/NIS
ACLW-172
1710060
ACLW-26623 dic 60
EGCA - 18888 12 Dec 62
Sent to FID/AN
now
Vel
بیند
Val
This list is to be destroyed after documents are returned to RD/Files
S-E-C-S-E-T
Mr. Ernest G. Maycrink
Dear Mr. Maycrink:
Effective 31 October 1960, all contracte, oral or written, by and between
you and the United States Government, as represented by the Contracting
Officer, are hereby terminated by mutual consent of the parties thereto, and
In lieu thereof the following agreement is substituted.
The United States Covernment, as represented by the Contracting Officer.
heroby contracts with you as an independent contractor for the submission of
certain information and related services of a confidental nature under the
following terms and conditioner
1. Compensation. In full consideration for the submission of such intor
mation and service, you will receive from the Government, payable in such
an approved manner as you may direct in writing, the following:
(a) Basic compensation in an amount calculated at the rate of
$6000 per annum.
(b) Additional compensation in an amount calculated at the rate
of $3000 per annum for cost-of-living expenses (including
quarters), effective upon your arrival at and applicable only
to your contemplated permanent post of assignment overseas.
Quarters will not be furnished you nor will you accept quarters
provided by a cover facility without prior amendment of this
agres nont.
2. Taxes. Montes paid you directly or guaranteed by the Government
under this paragraph constitute income for Federal tax purposes. You will
be advised as to the method to be followed in reporting and paying such taxes.
The method as well as the procedures used by this organisation to imple-
ment its tax reporting responsibilines will be based primarily upon cover
and seçarity requirements. You herein authorize this organization to with-
hold taxes on said income if it determines such requirements so necessitate.
3. Travel. You will be advanced or reimbursed funds for travel and
transportation expenses to and from your permanent post of duty-overseas
and for authorised operational travel. You inay be entitled to per diem in
lieu of subsistence during such travel and, when authorized, while on
temporary duty away from your permanent post of assignment. All travel,
transportation and per diem provided for under this paragraph must be
properly authorized, and expenses incurred hereunder are subject to pay-
ment and accounting in substantial compliance with Covernment regulations.
4. Operational Expenses. You will be advanced or reimbursed funds for
necessary operational expenses as specifically approved and financially limit
ed by the Government. Such funds will be subject to payinent and accounting
in substantial conformance with applicable Governinant regulations.
5. Fepayment. It is recognized that your failure to account for or refund
any monios advanced you hereunder shall entitle the Covernment to withhold
the total amount of such indebtedness or any portion thereof from any monies
due you under the terms of this contract in such manner as it deems appro-
priate.
3477
AMW
14-00000
Negotiated Benefits. (a) (i), if, in the performance of activities under
this agreeinant, you incur an injury in or illness which is not the result of your
gross negligence, willful misconduct, or intemperate act, the Covernment
will provide medical, surgical, hospital, transportation and disability beno
fits in such amounts and under such conditions as the Coverament
discretion deena proper provided, however, that such benefits shall not
ent in its sole
axceed a fate!! $5000 for the same injury or illness.
(2) If you die in the performance of activities
areunder and your death is is not the result of your g
misconductor intemperate
ar gross negligence, willlu
intemperate act, the Covernment will pay the sum of $5000
to your beneficiary(s) less any amount paid to you under sub-paragraph (1)
above if such injury or fitness resulted in your death, provided that said
beneficiary(ies) is acceptable to the Covernment at the time such payment is
to be made. An acceptable beneficiary hereunder is an indivisual to whom
payment by the U.S. Government can be made without conflicting with its
avowed principles and ideals.
(b) Cutstanding performance by you under this
agreement and your fulfillment of obligations hereunder in an efficient man-
ner will result in the Government undertaking your resettlement in an area
mutually agreeable to both parties, to the extent decined appropriate by the
United States Government.
7. Execution of Documents. II, in the performance of services under
this contract, you assume the custudy of Government funds or take title of
record to property of any nature whatsoever and wherever situate, which
property has in fact been purchased with montes of the U.S. Coveradient,
you hereby recognize and acknowledge the existence of a trust relationship,
either express or constructive, and you agree to execute whatever documents
may be required by this organization to evidence this relationship.
8. Status. You are not an employee of the United States Coverac-ent
under this agreement and are not entitled to any benefits normally incident
to an employee status.
9. Funding. If necessary to protect the security of this arrange:nent,
monies due you hereunder inay be funded in other than a direct nauner. It
is understood and agreed that any mchies so funded constitute payment by
the Covernment in satisfaction of its obligations under this agreement.
10. Cover. (a) It is anticipated that you will undertake a cover venture
in the course of your performance under this agreement. Such venture must
be approved by the appropriate Government representative overseeing your
activities prior to its initiation. Any and all documents which you may
execute in the course of said cover venture are subordinate to this agree-
ment and any contradiction in terms which in any way amplly, extend or
restrict your rights and/or obligations hereunder shall be resolved by this
agreement which shall always be dominant.
(b) To provide capital for your approved cover venture the
Government will loan you 54900w be secured by a non-interest bears, prom
lsory note, payable on demand. Said loan will be deposited to an account
in a foreign bank and a $3000 letter of credit will be issued you against that
deposit. The additional $1900 will be released from said account, after
approvalby the Government representative overseeing your activities.
:
(c). You will submit to the Covernment quarterly income and
expense statements on the cover venture and copies of all tax returns filed
in connection therewith. Your cover accounts shall be kept separate and
distinct from the bank account into which your personal compensation pay-
ments are made.
(d) You herein agree that monies loaned you by the Coverament
shall be repaid from the profits of the cover venture, in a nounts and ất
periodic intervals to be established by the Government ernment representative over
seeing your activities. Alter said loan has been completely repaid and all
other obligations, such as local taxes, etc., have been made, you ou m may retain
any further profi derived from paid cover venture. However, it is clearly
understood and agreed that your primary obligation under this agreement is
the performance of Governinental activities.
11. Socrecy. All information related to this agreement conveyed through
instructions, this instrument, or otherwise, is secret and shall not be di-
vulged to to any any person, organization or government in any form or ma manner,
except as authorized by the undersigned Contracting Officer executing this
areement. It is agreed that any revelation whatssover of the above infor-
mation will constitute and be an immediate and final breach of this agree
ment and will result in forfeiture by you of any and all benefits which may
then have accrued to you by reason of this agreement.
12. Instructions. During the term of this agreement, and in your
official cover capacity you herein agree to act in conformance with instruc-
tions, oral or written given you by authorized representatives of this organi-
zation.
13. Unauthorized Commitments. No promises or commitmente per-
taining to rights, privileges or benefits other than those expressly stipulated
in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto shall be binding on
this organization.
14. Term. This contract is effective as of 1 November 1960, and shall
continue thereafter for a period of two (2) years unless soccer terminated
by the Governinent either:
(a) Ey sixty (60) days' actual notice to you from the Government, or
(b) Without prior notice, in the event of a breach of this contract by
your violation of the security provisions hereof or by your otherwise.
rendering yourself unavailable for acceptable service.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, this agreement may be extended
upon notice from the Government. In the event of voluntary termination on
your part or termination for cause by the Government prior to the expiration
of this agree:nant or any renewal thereof, you will not be entitled to return
travel expenses to the United States. Termination or expiration of this agree
ment will not release you from the obligation of any security oath you may
be required to take.
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
!
Er
Contracting Chicer
ACCEPTED:
Emist. G. Daymiz
ernest G. Maycrink
WINESS! Charles R. Roistade 4VED.
14-00000
UNCLASSE
AL
DOL ONLY
(Optional)
SR/DOB
Dow Nesciur
Div. 2110 I Bldg.
7.
8.
9.
10
11.
12.
13
14.
15.
FORM
1 DEC 36
CONFIDL
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
28 OCT 1960
26/01/
GFA 33152
DAT
OFFICER'S COMMENT
INITIALS.
For Dave's file
Fr5re Gum..doe.
-
Maybe you can use some of this
nift for Daves deas.
K.
AFA 1
:
201-233477
UNCLASSIFIED
D. S, GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1958.0-476733
610
USE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
1
"
in
SECRET
REDWOOD/REDSOX/REACRE
S/CATO EGFA 32052
TO Chief SR
FRO: Chief of Base, Frankfurt
SECRET
Subject:
DOB:
Address:
ABASPIC
Cover for Contact:
Notes on Contact:
SECRE
Attament
to EGFA
REDSOX Spotting and Assessment
Report
Friganza as Maj. Michael Long.
Rostedt as George Fowler
Date Apr!! 1959
Rostedt and Friganza took the night train to Paris, arriving morning 6 6 April,
and discussed the AFASPIC case with the Paris station. Rostedt briefed COS/POS
Friganza departed to mect led to mect Subject ar
es on current REDSOX. Rostedt and
about 1130 hrs., taking extreme precautions against surveillance.
and others
Subject did not appear at the rendezvous at 12 hours. We waited until 1230
delayed
hours when Friganza decided to visit Annick to determine if subject had been de
En route to Annick Friganza changed his mind and returned to the rendezvous
(Georges V) where he he saw Rostedt with Subject. Subject: had apparently gone to the
Georges VI rendezvous, (which is understandable considering the hurried circumstances
of the previous parting when the rendezvous was discussed), had waited perhaps 1/2
hr. and then decided he had better check the Georges V. On arrival at the Georges V
Rostedt immediately recognized him, approached the taxi which Sübject had left and
re-entered, looked hard at Subject who caught the significance of Rostedt's extra-
ordinary attentions, ordered the taxi around the corner, paid him his due fare, and
re-Joined Rostedt. It was at this moment that Friganza returned on intuition.
The trio then went to lunch, taking a circuitous route by foot and taxi. Cver
lunch from about 13-15 hours Rostedt had an opportunity to acquaint himself with
Subject and to put to Subject several questions concerning willingness and the job.
1
After lunch Friganza and Rostedt decided that under the circumstances it would
be advisable to keep Subject in Faris rather than risk his arrest travelling between
Paris and Ambert or returning to Gap to have his carte d'identite, revalidated.
Accordingly while Rostedt spent the next is hrs. or so with Subject, Friganza
returned to the Paris Station where he asked for the use of 15 rue Weber safehouse.
Paris Station had committed the safehouse for the night of 6 and 7 April as well
as the morning of 8 April but beginning late afternoon 8 April the house was
assigned for the use of AEASPIC. Arrangements were made to have Platipodis who
knows Subject to be at the safehouse at 1650 hours (alternate 2530 hrs.) on 8 April.
Subject was Instructed to go to the safehouse, ring 3 longs, 2 short, whereupon
he would be admitted by Platipodis. He was likewise given the name John Sandor and
told that in the event of unavoidable nquiry he should claim that he had been lent
the apartment by Tom Brown, a friend of John Sandor. He was instructed not to
answer the phone and not immediately to answer the door. If after persistent ringing
he felt obliged to answer the door, he should pretend he had drunk too much wine,
was cleeping heavily, and should come to the door appearing groggy. Subject was
further instructed to stay in the sarehouse during daylight hours and to venture out
at night only if necessary to buy food, eat, etc. He was told that Friganza would
return for him sometime between land 16. April.
Between 6 and 8 April Subject will stay with Annick.During the day he will
avoid the house, going to movies, etc., appearing only at night to sleep.
Subject was paid Francs 49.874 (exactly 8700).
:
SECRET
Anthony H. Friganza.
Case Officer
SECRET
2 Apr11 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief of Station, Germany
FROM
Chief of Base, Frankfurt
SUBJECT
for Operational Use
Application for Issuance of Bundesrepublik
Personalausweis fo
Personal Details on the Person to whom Issued:
(a) Last name: Ludeau
(b) First name: Martin
(o) Birthdate: 18 September 1919, Trier
(d) Citizenship at birth: German
(e) Height: it: 174 cm.
(f) Color of eyes: Brown
(g) Glasses: No
(h) Build: Mittel
(1) Weight: 56 kg.
(J) City of residence: Anything convenient
(k) Place of Issuance of BdPA: Anything convenient.
2. Reason for Request: This document may be needed to bring AEASPIC
from France to Gormany. It would be used only after discussion with Dexter
E. Rostedt from AEACRE and with the approval of Chief of Base, Frankfurt and
Chief of Station, Paris to move Subject in this fashion. I have checked to
determine whether Subject can move without considerable danger in this fashion
and if it is customary; he can and it is.
3. Subject will need no other documents, being that this will be a
one time use to cross at Strasbourg. This document is being requested in the
event that it is needed for the 6 April meeting in Paris with Subject. Per
cables from Headquarters Rostedt is empowered to decide whether Subject should
be brought to Germany and if so, it would save one extra trip to Paris if this
document were carried by the undersigned to the 6 April meeting so that he
could be brought directly to Germany.
4. Photographs have already been given to the MKTOPAZ officer.
Anthony H. Friganza
Approved:
Deputy for Operations, cos
Atachment
to EGFA
REDSOX Spotting and Assessment
Report
Date 25 March 1959
Subiect: AEASPIC
DOB:
Address:
Cover for Contact:
Fotes on Contact:
The undersigned arrived in Paris on the morning of the 25th of March and went to
the safehouse where the LEFLUTTER operater had spent the night and was shortly
to meet Subject at the Cafe Les Sport near the Port Maillot. Subject passed by
as we were having coffee and according to instructions waited elsewhere. We
left while the operator collected Subs and tock him to the house, enabling
to return at about 11 hours.
returned
Subject was dismissed for lunch at about 1145, whereupon the operator and
the undersigned returned to the Embassy office where after a quick lunch the
questions for the examination were written. The operator met Subject, ret
to the house, and began the examination at about 1430, it having been agreed
we would appear at the safehouse promptly at 1630. be did this to find that the
operator had not concluded the examination but there was sufficient time to
continue which he did. The examination was completed about 1845 hours, whereupon
we were informed by the operator that in his opinion Subject was not attempting
to deceive on any important points, even though some of the more prosaic aspects
of his biography continue to defy logical acceptance.
We then discussed future meeting arrangements with Subject: Subject will
appear in front of the Cafe Georges V on the Champs Elysees at 1214 and 16 hours
on 6 April. He will wait for five minutes in front of the cafe but will hot:
enter. If we are not there he will return for the alternate. In any event
alternate contact will be made through Annick. Subject was instructed to clear
up his affairs in Ambert and be prepared to depart for Germany; however, it was.
also explained to Subject that we were not authorized to make a final commitment
to Subject and that much as we regretted this, this would be left until 6 April.
Subject was paid Francs 15,500 for which no receipt was obtained since we were
in a hurry to catch a plane for the Hague. If Subject has any difficulties he
will write Annick. He will not return to Gap. He expects to stay with Josef
Dassaud in Ambert until the night of 5 April when he will travel to Paris by
train. It was further agreed that on or about 4 or 5 April Subject will have
sent a letter to Annickfor "Mike" in which he will conform his arrival and in
double talk inform us if he has had any trouble.
We discüssed with Platipodis of the Paris station the need to send "Maurice"
to Annick on 4 or 5 April to see if Subject had written.
SECRET
Anthony H. Friganza
Case Officer
SECRET
Attachment
to EGFA
REDSOX Spotting and Assessment
Report
Date
bject: AEASPIC
DOB:
Address:
Cover for Contact:
Fotes on Contact:
20 March 1959: Upon the receipt of DIR
the undersigned borrowed a car
from om the Paris station on
on 19 March and drove that night to Moulins, s; arriving about
9 o'clock. From the principal hotel in this town a call was made to Subject who
was informed that we would arrive at Ambert at about 12 o'clock, and we we agreed to
set at the railroad station at 1200 hours. We proceeded to Vichey where we changed
clothes and bathed and arrived at Ambert about 1220 -- Subject was waiting. He re
urned the car lent by Dassaud, one of his business partners, to the residence cum
work shop at 14 rue St. Josef. We waited outside for Subject who came out, got
into the car and we drove to a restaurant which we left immediately as it was too
crowded and returned on foot to 14 rue St. Josef house where our conversati
held. Incidentally, Subject showed the undersigned around the work shop and
demonstrated how the machine and the
was
for it are made. One cannot
help but marvel at Subject's ingenuity and ability as a tinkerer and pseudo-sort
of engineer. He said they are producing about 300 a month, sell a few more than
this at 48,000 francs a piece (nearly $100). However, Subject gets no Income other
than pocket money, free room and board where he now lives, and will not receive
any until the capital outlay of his other two partners has been amortized. Taking
the bull by the horns we explained to Subject the delay: A telegram had been sent
to "certain colleagues" in Paris who were supposed to write a letter to be for-
warded to Subject. The man to whom the telegram was sent was on leave and upon
return he was not notified of the telegram we sent; consequently, Subject was not
informed as he should have been. We are terribly sorry and hope that Subject would
appreciate, such a minor matter. In any event we reminded Subject that he had not
een promised a letter on or about 1 February but rather told that he could expect
hear from us then. Subject agreed this was .so.
Subject was far less interested in explanation than a decision. He rhetorically
asked whether he was acceptable, adding he was obliged to assume he was not, and
commenting that although there are "many two legged people in America also" he
thought he was probably a unique persom from the point of view of language ability,
experience as an operator in dangerous situations, etc. We replied thus: One man
(the psychologist) has already come all the way from the States just to see Subject
and another was on his way. From this subject could fairly conclude the importance
"Headquarters" attaches to Subject's candidature and that far from being a dead
issue, Subject's prospects were good, although all depended on him.
We then turned to the matter of Subject coming to Paris. Subject explained
that Paul (
) had been sent by the Paris station
to Annick and had not done very well. He had failed to convince Annick that he was
sent by Mike (Friganza) and apparently although we did not go into the details of
this, he did not get the message straight. In any case Subject immediately said
that he could come to Paris anytime although he would be obliged to travel
illegally. This because he had permitted his identity document to expire as of 14
February 1959. However, Subject felt he could make the Journey by train without
being caught because the police are not checking most trains. He did not want to
travel by car because he had heard there are occasional road blocks (this may be
true for the undersigned ran into one on the drive from Paris to Ambert). Subject
also said he could stay as long as need by but it was absolutely essential "that he
not be obliged to stay at a hotel
he could either stay with Annick or at a place
put at his disposal by us.
:
Case Officer
SECRET
(c). You will submit to the Covernment quarterly income and
expense statements on the cover venture and copies of all tax returns filed
in connection therewith. Your cover accounts shall be kept separate and
distinct from the bank account into which your personal compensation pay-
ments are made.
(d) You herein agree that monies loaned you by the Coverament
shall be repaid from the profits of the cover venture, in a nounts and ất
periodic intervals to be established by the Government ernment representative over
seeing your activities. Alter said loan has been completely repaid and all
other obligations, such as local taxes, etc., have been made, you ou m may retain
any further profi derived from paid cover venture. However, it is clearly
understood and agreed that your primary obligation under this agreement is
the performance of Governinental activities.
11. Socrecy. All information related to this agreement conveyed through
instructions, this instrument, or otherwise, is secret and shall not be di-
vulged to to any any person, organization or government in any form or ma manner,
except as authorized by the undersigned Contracting Officer executing this
areement. It is agreed that any revelation whatssover of the above infor-
mation will constitute and be an immediate and final breach of this agree
ment and will result in forfeiture by you of any and all benefits which may
then have accrued to you by reason of this agreement.
12. Instructions. During the term of this agreement, and in your
official cover capacity you herein agree to act in conformance with instruc-
tions, oral or written given you by authorized representatives of this organi-
zation.
13. Unauthorized Commitments. No promises or commitmente per-
taining to rights, privileges or benefits other than those expressly stipulated
in writing in this agreement or any amendment thereto shall be binding on
this organization.
14. Term. This contract is effective as of 1 November 1960, and shall
continue thereafter for a period of two (2) years unless soccer terminated
by the Governinent either:
(a) Ey sixty (60) days' actual notice to you from the Government, or
(b) Without prior notice, in the event of a breach of this contract by
your violation of the security provisions hereof or by your otherwise.
rendering yourself unavailable for acceptable service.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, this agreement may be extended
upon notice from the Government. In the event of voluntary termination on
your part or termination for cause by the Government prior to the expiration
of this agree:nant or any renewal thereof, you will not be entitled to return
travel expenses to the United States. Termination or expiration of this agree
ment will not release you from the obligation of any security oath you may
be required to take.
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
!
Er
Contracting Chicer
ACCEPTED:
Emist. G. Daymiz
ernest G. Maycrink
WINESS! Charles R. Roistade 4VED.
D. HENDRYCK S. VINCENT
IM FRUTZ FRANKFURT 13/1
FRANKFURT/HAIN
WEST DELITSCHLAND)
14-00000
L
Abs. Johan Witure
136 cho
che-ps Elyoun Paris (8")
Lber Dike
sh
de
? Ich habe sunt lange zuit
keine nachricht bekommen git die letzte brief. 5. 1διά
Ich möchte ger
lage
in ich wich
ob ich balt war kargen werde
le erwarten win ich sicher
te vor oder wach
sen. Eine datin, g. 6. spel, ds huge
wenn mehr piuntklichkeit ist nicht möglich
Schreiben the an Amick (unter e Himsdlage) sie
macht das weiter, weil ich bin nicht mehr in meiner
alter adrene (fur weningsten nach 15 lage ).
Eine telegram wurde ich berser.
PS. Meine
Fremdschaftlich
adrese ist bei
Amick
wenn sie
verlangen
Subject:
APA DAVID
Dates of interview: 8, 9, 10 Jan 1959
Subject was met in Paris by the case officer and examiner and
submitted to an intensive preliminary ps psychological examination. He was
camined via a french interpreter. The interpreter reter has has been request requested to
submit his own assessment to the undersigned.
2. Subject is 40 years of age. He was born on the 12th of July,
1918, in Georgia, USSR. At that time Georgia was a free country and not
part of the USSR.
3. Subject regards his parents as "nobles" and he feels that their
status had a great influence on his behaviour in the period which followed
the family's immigration into France in 1921.
4. Subject feels he acquired a certain prejudicial class attitude
and abided by the principle of noblesse oblige. In other words he feels
that if you pretend to be something, you have to act accordingly. His
concept of nobility has evolved into a concept of dignity and pride in his
work.
5. The family left Georgia when the Subject was three. They fled
before the Soviet invasion. Subject feels that his real existence began
at this point. Because the father had provided himself with certain monies,
the family was able to live comfortably and even opulently. However, the
vicissitudes of life brought the family progressively to material degradation
and financial difficulties which greatly influenced Subject's way of think-
ing thereafter. Whereas the family had previously lived in an artificial
feudalistic way, life became tough. Subject feels that the family was
brought into more direct contact with reality and that this was not
necessarily a bad influence.
6. Subject actually did not want to leave Georgia. He felt it was
a flight rather than a tactical retreat. Apparently he has never been
able to accept this humiliating defeat and it may be that part of his
current motivation for affiliation involves his perception of an opportunity
to take countermeasures against the Soviets. He is a person who cannot
tolerate being beaten in competition.
00000
/2/
7. Subject was was a non-disciplined child and was in constant rebellion
against his teachers
whom he felt did not discriminate intelligent children
or pay him sufficient individual attention. Apparently his rebellious be
haviour was his way of getting attention. He felt his teachers were too
distant and automatically unpleasant. He engaged in practical Jokes and
was an activist in the school situation. As a result he was kicked out
of one school after another and has a history of attending 18 different
schools. The least that can be said of this strange behaviour, is that he
was undisciplined and has always refused to abide by the conformist
attitude of his peers. On the contrary he has always felt compelled to
do those things not normally done by others. The 18 schools, generally
speaking, represent frustration, the seeking of an aim to pursue, and the
hope that his ideal would crystallize and materialize. Subject is rather
abstract in this respect. Generally, it would seem that his ideal is
first of all material and perhaps also moral comfort and security. However,
he has always regarded his society, through his disappointments and
mortifying experiences, as a wicked and selfish in its majority. Since
he felt society was selfish and mean, he expressed his dissatisfaction
in the form of aggressive and destructive behaviour. Apparently Subject
was a precocious child and he experienced disillusionment in his family
and in society. It is as if he suddently discovered to his great dis-
appointment that there was no Santa Claus.
8. At first Subject felt his disillusionment was unique and peculiar
to his particular life experience, but he soon discovered that his dis-
content was characteristic of others. He experienced this fighting
attitude within himself and he reflected it in his non-conforming be-
haviour.
9. His mother reacted to his behaviour with over-affectionate
solicitousness. She wasn't actually able to determine the reasons for his
internal distress, but she was aware something was taking place within him.
The mother was apparently a marked conformist who insisted that Subject
abide by the social order. She took him to a psychiatrist because of his
behaviour problems and because she did not advise him of what she was
doing and got him to a psychiatrist on a subterfuge, and because Subject
did not agree with the psychiatrist's conclusions, he did not benefit
by this experience. This indicates to us that in handling Subject it
would be wise not to approach him as if he were the problem, but to permit
hin to maintain his posture that he is right and society is wrong. In
other words we must avoid doing what his mother did to him.
It
10. Subject has always indulged in a sort of introspection and
self-analysis, the purpose of which was to determine how to realize his
aspirations. Another aspect of his system of ideals proceeds from the
life concept of chivalry which he feels his parents inculcated. This in-
volves the defense and the protection of the oppressed and the weak.
is sort of a Robin Hood concept which he attributes to himself. This
chivalrous ideal is active to date. He feels that many people need help
and he has always wanted to help others in order to help himself. In other
words he is motivated to helping others in order to obtain love and
affection. This need for love and affection is probably the most primary
of his motives.
11. In respect to the flight of the family from Georgia, Subject feels
he was too young to understand it. However, he feels he revolted against
it. His idea is that one must fight, surpass and conquer. As a young boy
he felt he was much stronger than several million men. This is extremely
important as regards utilization of his services. First of all he is
motivated to succeed out of a spirit of revenge, and secondly he is self-
confidant and optimistic that he will succeed despite the hazards of the
all he
undertaking. He is like a man who wants to kill an elephant
wants from us is a high-powered rifle
then he feels he would be equal
to the elephant.
12. Subject also seems to reflect disappointment in his father as
a personal ideal. He regards his father as a very independent person,
kind but profoundly selfish, büt who would nevertheless give you the
shirt off his back. His father was fond of the children, loved the whole
family and was happy when he saw others happy. However, Subject is con-
vinced that if his father had succeeded, none of the things that happened
in his life would have come to pass. He feels that his mother's suicide..
is a direct consequence of his father's failure to succeed.
13. When his father and sister returned to Georgia, Subject was driven
to despair by the breaking-up of the family. The death of his mother and
the departure of his father and sister was quite a threat to his security.
He tried to hold his father back and even threatened him that because of
a French law according to which a foreigner must pay his taxes before he
leaves the country, the father ran the risk of being arrested. When he
told this to his sister, she became angry with him and replied that the
father was mature enough to act as well as possible. Subjects attempt
to prevent his father from leaving was conflictual for him because it
represented an interference with his father's desire and project. This
experience taught him that when his father had taken a decision, he would
carry it through at any cost. As it happened, the result was the dis-
integration of the family. If Subject found himself in the same
situation today, he would act in exactly the same way.
14. The father apparently returned to Georgia because he wanted to
die in Georgia. Subject feels that his father was doing something important
to realize his objectivity or to achieve his purpose. However, he feels
his father accepted defeat by returning to Georgia to die. The mother
did not go with the father and apparently was at her wits end after the
father left. Subject regards his mother as the axle of the family and
when he lost her through suicide, he feels she deserted him.
15. Subject's sister followed her father to Georgia out of a spirit
of affection and sacrifice. She felt that her father needed her and
Subject feels she was a tributary of his mistakes. The sister has a Ph.D.
in languages and taught courses in school. At the time of Stalin the
children would say "we have done this and that thanks to Stalin" and she
would reply "you are individuals and you have done this or that without
Stalin." As a result she was arrested and sent to a concentration camp.
With the change of regimes she obtained her freedom and got her job back...
16. The sister's husband returned to Russia