14-00000
104-10118-10427
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Organization and activities of the
Deputy Director (Research)
Development Projects Division - Special Projects Branch
As recommended, the Special Projects Branch of DPD plus the
necessary supporting units have been transferred to DD/R.
Technical Services Division
Further study did not commend implementation of the Working
Group's recommendation that all TSD research and development be
placed under DD/R. The DD/P made a substantial argument in favor
of leaving all of TSD under his control in order to insure close and
Intimate relations with the operating units. Further, an argument of
almost overwhelming proportions indicated that the DD/R already had
some very major responsibilities without taking on the diverse and
generally unrelated responsibilities of TSD.
Other Research and Development
After considerable additional study it was decided to transfer all
ELINT to DD/R, except for the direct command of certain field units
which under all circumstances should be left under the station chiefs.
Research and development in support of NPIC would fall under DD/R
for those very advanced items, but not for current production require-
ments.
-8-
14-00000
x
Part II
Coordination
The staff of the Assistant for Coordination has continued to work
on the same basis as formerly and continues to be constituted of
assignees from other agencies. There appears to be progress in
achieving closer inter-agency coordination, but whether this is due
to the work of the Coordination Staff or to the DCI's personal interest
in this subject would be hard to determine.
Princeton Consultants to ONE.
This group has been continued.
National Photographic Interpretation Center
The Executive Director has personally kept under review the work-
load of NPIC. NPIC is recruiting in anticipation of an increased work-
load.
Caliber of Personnel
The new DD/I is cognizant of this problem and is taking steps to
improve the caliber of the personnel.
Merger of ONE and OCI
It has been decided not to merge these offices.
Preparation and Dissemination of Memoranda
Too many uncoordinated memoranda are still being circulated.
The practice of asking other departments to prepare memoranda has
not been adopted.
White House Relations
(This matter was handled orally by the Working Group and con-
sequently the comments will be handled similarly.)
-9-
14-00000
уу
Research on International Communism
The DD/I has established a special staff under an experienced
intelligence officer for this purpose, and this staff is getting gradually
organized.
Office of Scientific Intelligence
OSI is remaining under DD/I, but DD/R will eventually open his
career service to those who wish to join it.
DD/R's Operational Responsibilities
It has been firmly established that DD/R will operate those pro-
jects which he develops. We believe that DD/R has implemented some
of the principles in the special annex of the Working Group report.
- 10 -
14-00000
a
Organization and Activities of the
Intelligence Community
National Indications Center - Watch Committee
General Carter, the new Chairman of the Watch Committee, has
made a thorough review of its activities and NIC operations. Steps
have been taken to see that NIC is properly manned with the right
personnel, and the Department of State is being constantly reminded
of its obligations in this regard. We also believe that the methods of
operations of the Watch Committee have now been aligned in accord-
ance with the objectives of the Working Group.
CIA Relations with the Department of State
Since the issuance of the Working Group report, a special team
composed of a senior representative from the Agency and from the
Department of State have studied the entire problem of "cover." They
have reached an agreed formula for this cover and for correcting some
of the problems that attracted the attention of the Working Group. This
includes the Foreign Servicordesignations A new agreement has been
reached on the handling of State communications. Since the production
of the Working Group report the level on which COMINT policy is
handled in CIA has been raised to that of Assistant Deputy Director.
State's Counter Communism Office
The proposal for the creation of such an office in the Department
of State appears to have come to naught.
State's Operational Center
The State Operational Center also appears to have come to naught.
State at White House Briefings
The Department of State does not attend the White House briefings.
Receipt of Top Classification Messages
The DCI has taken up with the White House the necessity for being
included in the dissemination of all top classification messages.
- 11
14-00000
SECRET
X
1. The organization of the DCI/DDCI's office is currently under study.
2. The Audit Staff is removed from the DD/S area and placed under
the Inspector General.
3. The Conmptroller is removed from the DD/3 area, given greatly
expanded responsibilities, ana will report directly to the DCI/
DDCI's office.
4. The General Counsel's office is removed from under the DD/S,
will resume responsibility for Congressional relations, and will
report directly to the DCI/DDCI's office.
5. The Office of Operations is disbanded. Contact Division to DD/P
as nucleus for Domestic Division. Foreign Documents Division
to be combined with OCR Library. Foreign Broadcast Information
Division to be independent unit reporting directly to DD/I.
6. Position of Assistant DD/P for Covert Action abolished.
7. Assistant DD/P for Paramilitary and Air Support Operations created.
8. Central Support Staff under DD/P created. This will draw together
such support as personnel, logistics and budget and will also take
over technical support from those operating units of TSD which
remain in the DD/P, e.g., secret writing, audio operations, etc.
The Central Support Staff will also absorb the present Operational
Services Staff and certain other activities.
9. A Special Task Force is created for such operations of a magnitude
that transcends the capabilities of one division.
1C. The International Organizations Division and Covert Action Staff
are combined, putting together our largest activities in this field.
11. A Domestic Division is created. This will absorb as its nucleus
Contact Division of CO from the DD/I, the Commercial Staff, the
Air Proprietary Branch from DPD, ultimately the management of
CAT from the DD/S, and those aspects of cover which involve
contacts with the U.S. business community.
12. A Deputy Director for Research is created. This organization will
take over the Office of Scientific Intelligence from the DD/I, Special
Projects m DPD, all research and development from TSD, and
other research and development activities currently located in various
units of the Agency such as the Office of Communications, NPIC, etc.
SECRET
14-00000
March 29, 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Notes on discussions between myself, Carter, Kirkpatrick
Coyne and Schuyler in review of report of the Kirkpatrick
Committee
Following recommendations call for further consideration and
possible modification.
I. Office of the DCI
1. Page ll - Comptroller
Terms of Reference of the Financial Policy and Budget
Committee under the Comptroller and the Executive Committee
as provided hereafter must be clarified to provide continuing
program review by a senior committee as part of an orderly
program and budget process.
2. Office of Coordination.
Differences between Kirkpatrick and Schuyler position
as outlined in the report and Coyne's position should be
considered and reconciled. Page 3, Item C. Responsibility for
SIGINT policies and resulting international arrangements as a
responsibility of this office should be further considered.
3. Public relations directive should be issued on policy of
speech making and public appearances by Agency employees,
Including DCI and the Deputies.
4. Page 6. Reduction of force consideration should be given
with continuing 3-man management review committee (such as
the Kirkpatrick Committee) exploring for the DCI and the DDCI
ways and means of eliminating duplication and consolidating
functions, eliminating unnecessary activities, with the objective
of developing better organization at lesser cost and with
fewer personnel.
5. 6. B. Terms of Reference for the Executive Director and
the selection of this man should be discussed between McCone
and Carter at an early date.
14-00000
X
II. Office of DD/P
1. Page 9: Important to move on an Assistant DD/P for
Paramilitary operations and air support. There is
continuing criticism of the Agency for lack of professionalism
in these activities, most particularly airborne.
2. Domestic Division.
Care must be exercised and the merger of Contact
Division with the balance of the Domestic Division and
also care must be exercised to be sure that the Domestic
Division "gathers up" all fragments of CIA's activities
dispersed throughout the United States with the exception
of Security Division.
3. Deputy Chief of the Division of British Commonwealth
Definition of this office must be worked out to avoid
confusion with respect to small British areas such as Hong
Kong, Singapore, British Guiana, etc. The purpose of
this office probably to handle Commonwealth versus Colonial
Office affairs.
4. CIA/State Relations.
Review of salary allowances, expense accounts,
living conditions, etc., of CIA agents under State cover
versus Foreign Service Officers comparable conditions
should be made and if criticism legitimate, corrective
measures should be taken without impairing ability Shtefs
of Station to handle special costly situations which might
be done by specific authorization Also audit and control
of personal expenses of COS must be developed immediately.
III. Office of DD/I
1. Carter and McCone should agree on selection of a DD/I,
Deputy DD/I and Chief of OCI as initial step in improving personnel
within this office.
2. Merger of O/NE and OCI should be delayed until new
DD/I is installed and makes his recommendations.
- 2
-
14-00000
3. National Board of Estimates should be reviewed and
improved where necessary and consideration given to formation
of a special group within O/NE to analyze on a continuing basis
objectives of Soviet/sino Bloc, international communism and
their pursuit of their cold war activities and in their efforts to
establish world domination. Note: This office previously
existed directly under DD/I but was abandoned a few months
ago.
4. Proper liaison with finance, State Department, and
agreed methods for DCI to brief NSC as provided by law
should be worked out.
5. National Photographic Interpretation Center, Page 19.
Note this requires immediate study, possibly by USIB.
Fear that the work load on the NPIC will overwhelm it and as a
result it will be unable to process vast amount of information
during months of May through September should be quickly studied
and arrangements made through USIB to disperse read-out to SAC
and Army St. Louis Center if doing so necessary to keep our
processing and read-out on a current basis. This matter
considered of greatest importance.
IV. Elements of DD/R
1. It should be recognized that Deputy Director for
Research is a cover and this office not necessarily confined
to research but should be tasked with operationed responsibi-
lities. Also most important project under DD/R is OXCART,
therefore DD/R must be restrained from taking on collateral
activities so fast that OXCART will suffer. The DD/R
responsibilities will cover all phases of Agency responsibility
and activity in NRO which may or may not include the actual
operation of OXCART. It will include intelligence input into
OXCART and CORONA and SAMOS planning, irrespective of
where operations rest.
2. Location of OSI should be resolved.
3. Interrelationship between DD/R and DD/P to provide
staff support and particularly the CI production should be
established by directive of Deputy DCI.
-3-
14-00000
4. With respect to page 23, certain operational responsibi-
lities should pass from DD/R to DD/P upon completion of
research and development; however a study should be made to
determine whether the many fully integrated operational activities
such as OX CART and some fully integrated ELINT operations
should not be permanently under DD/R who is to have both
operational and research and development responsibilities.
Considerations of OXCART
1. Responsibility for all phases of OXCART are to follow
the direct supervision of Sec/Def and DCI by agreement with the
OD, Charyk as AR/Sec. Def., will be executive head of NRO, DD/R
will be his Deputy and by assignment will be responsible for all
phases of OXCART.
2. Details of operations, as contrasted to R&D, will be
worked out at a later date.
3. NSC directive agreed OXCART tasks are responsibility
of Special Group and question of augmentation is a matter for Special
Group, not CIA, to decide.
4. 4. DD/R should be charged with the responsibility of
mobilizing and utilizing all necessary resources of DD/I, DD/P and
DD/S and General Counsel in performance of DD/R's assigned respon-
sibility as Deputy Director NRO and manager of OXCART project.
5. Question of use of Air Force officers versus civilians
must be decided by higher authority, likewise the question of operational
responsibility between that of CIA or DD/R or personnel secanded from
the Air Force versus direct Air Force operation must be decided by DCI
and Sec/Def. and the President after careful consideration of all issues
and problems relating to this matter.
6. Because of imminence of commencement of test
flights immediate careful attention should be given to all aspects of
the cover story as certain inforination concerning the plane will
become known when it is observed in FAA (that other) radar
V. National Indications Center Watch Committee
1. Appointment should be made next week for General
Carter and myself to visit the NIC and the DLA Centers and
observe the Watch Committee operations and make a judgment
as to whether this organization is properly set up and
efficiently operating, and to resolve differences between
Mr. Coyne and USIB.
14-00000
mfb
2. White House briefings should continue; a substitute
for Mr. Amory should be arranged until a more adequate
arrangement is provided: Daily briefings of Bundy, Clifton
and Taylor and an occasional briefing of the President by
DCI should suffice.
-5-
JOHN A. McCONE
Director
14-00000
:
6 April 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
: Final Report of Working Group on Organization
and Activities
1. I have the honor to present herewith the final report of the
working group which you established in January to consult with you and
advise on the organization and activities of the Central Intelligence
Agency, and of its relationship with other agencies in the intelligence
community. This report reflects the views of the working group and is
divided into two parts. The first part deals primarily with the organiza-
tion of the Central Intelligence Agency and reflects the unanimous views
of the working group. The second part contains comments and recom-
mendations on areas dealing with the work of the Central Intelligence
Agency and activities of the intolligence community in which the working
group was either unable to agree or felt that considerably more study
was needed before action was taken.
2. For the record I would note that the working group held its
first session on January 3 and met on 35 different days between that date
and its final session with you on March 28. During its work the group
had approximately 100 briefings. Most of these briefings dealt with the
organization and activities of the Central Intelligence Agency, but also
included a full day spent with the Department of State in addition to several
briefings on State Department activities and its relations with CIA; approxi-
mately one-half day spent in the Pentagon in addition to other briefings
by the Defense Intelligence Agency; and a full week spent visiting SAC,
NORAD and other activities in the United States. We were briefed by
the head of every major component in the CIA with the exception of three
DD/P area divisions whose briefings had to be excluded because of the
pressure of time. However, we feel that having heard from four other
area aivisions the working group had a knowledge of the activities and
problems of these units. In addition to the 100 briefings, the working
group had more than ten executive sessions in which it discussed and
debated at great length its findings and conclusions. Finally, there were
SECXET
17684 см
14-00000
some 20 meetings with yourself, and with senior Agency officials to
discuss our findings and conclusions. These included at least two
sessions with each of the Deputy Directors and with the Assistant
Director for National Estimates and the Assistant Director for Cur.
rent Intelligence.
3. The attached report does not purport to be complete or ex-
haustive in any respect, but rather it is an aide memoir to recall to
mind our oral discussions and to record some of the reasons and
philosophy behind our recommendations.
cc: DDCI
Attachment
Al
Lyman B. Kirkpatrick
Report was read by:
DDIR
DDIS
DD/I (and law Knightric Makan)
ADISI
ADIP
cy 7-destroyed
-2-
Scher
14-00000
PART I
This section deals primarily with the organization
of the Central Intelligence Agency and represents
the view of the entire Working Group.
SECRET
14-00000
OFFICE OF THE DCI
Organization of LCI's Office
We recoinmend that the organization of the DCI's office be
changed in order to provide more effective support to the DCI, a
systematized control of messages both oral and written, and a
clear delineation of the responsibilities of the assistants to the
DCI. In this connection we would urge that a secretariat be
created, that the head of this secretariat assign individual re-
sponsibilities to each of the personal assistants to the DCI, that
daily staff meetings be held for a full exchange on the activities
of the staff, and that all personnel in the Agency be advised as
to how to keep the DCI's staff informed properly of the activities
of the Agency.
Comptroller
We recommend that the Comptroller's office be brought
out from under the DD/S, report directly to the DCI's office and
receive full authority for total fiscal control of the Agency.
We recommend that the Comptroller be designated Chair-
man of a Financial Policy and Budget Committee composed of
the appropriate senior officers of the Agency. We believe that
✓
EED
SECRET
14-00000
such a committee should be kept fully and currently informed of
all Agency activities, and in order to be effective should meet
regularly and submit its reports to the DDCI and DCI,
Inspector General
We recommend that the Audit Staff be combined with the
staff of the Inspector General and that the merged staff report to
the DCI's office.
We believe that the size of the Inspector General Staff
should be increased with qualified professional personnel assigned
from their respective components in order to perform more
frequent inspections of Agency units. We urge'inspections at
Icast annually of major operations and of field stations.
General Counsel
We recommend that the General Counsel's staff be
removed from the organization of the Deputy Director (Support)
and report directly to the office of the DCI. In such a position
the General Counsel should resume the responsibility for the
direction and guidance of the work of the Legislative Counsel,
which is currently the responsibility of the Inspector General,
to
new
IG+
Noren
にこんないいい
-2-
SECRET
14-00000
Cable Secretariat
We have examined the Cable Secretariat which is currently
located in the office of the DCI and reports to the Executive Officer.
We believe it should continue to be in the office of the Director under
the careful supervision of the Executive Director. We are con-
cerned that as it now operates requirements for cables have not
been adequately coordinated, and cables have been disseminated
too often on the judgment of junior officers. We believe this needs
careful study.
Contracts
We believe that the Agency is vulnerable on sole-source
contracts for such activities as TSD and DPD, and that those
contracts currently in existence should be reviewed and that all
such future contracts should be passed on by the DCI's office
prior to approval.
Personnel Assignments
We believe that the DDCI and DCI should be the final
approving authority for all assignments to positions of Chief
or Deputy Chief of Offices (DD/P Divisions and Staffs) or of
field stations and bases, both foreign and domestic.
ED
نيا
DOCI
sanc
renew
-3-
SECRET
14-00000
We believe the DCI's office should also review all assiga, hardloo
ments in the middle management echelon with particular reference
to insuring the proper language qualifications, operational training
and suitability.
Public Relations
We recommend that the present system of public relations
by the Agency be changed. While we see the necessity for the
DCI to have an assistant in his office handling relations with the
public media, we believe that every effort should be made to
minimize the amount of publicity that CIA receives.
: We strongly recommend that the present practice of
giving background briefings to newspapermen cease and that
CIA give information to the press only where CIA has something
which for operational reasons should be released on an unattri-
butable basis. We urge that no public speeches be given by
Agency officials.
Reduction in Force
We recommend that the DCI and DDCI insure that the
present reduction in force in the Agency include senior officers,
particularly supergrades who are no longer as effective as they
should be in their assignments.
7
wader
ECD
: agree
-4-
SECRET
14-00000
Handling of Communications Other Than Cables
We note that under present arrangements communications
other than cables are handled by the Records Integration Division.
of DD/P, which is not always fully cognizant of the interests of
non-DD/P parts of the Agency. We recommend that the entire
system of handling incoming and outgoing communications be
subjected to further study with a view to insuring adequate dis-
semination of all communications, particularly in DD/I, DD/R
and DD/S, which may have need for prompt receipt of such
material.
Fo
to
1
Executive Director
We have not tried to spell out the responsibilities of the
Executive Director, inasmuch as we believe this to be primarily
a matter that should be tailored to the personal preferences of
the DCI and DDCI and how they wish to operate their office and
the Agency. We urge, however, that special attention be directed
to the avoidance of a straight vertical line of command; i.e., all
problems should not have to pass through each of the three officers.
Executive Committee
We recommend the creation of an Executive Committee
to be chaired by the DDCI and consist of the four Deputies, the
-5-
SECRET
14-00000
Comptroller, and the Assistant to the DCI for Coordination and
Intelligence Community Guidance. This Committee, from a
policy standpoint, would review proposed major projects and
maintain a continuous review of all major activities and make
appropriate recommendations thereon to the DCI. This Com-
mittee would replace the present Project Review Committee.
2
Include
ExD
IG
GC?
Delite
?
>
"AsspforCuerd?
i
-6-
SECRET
14-00000
G
D
ORGANIZATION AND ACTIVITIES OF THE
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Office of the DD/P
We commend the decision of the DD/P to abolish the position
of the A/DDP/A, and believe that the restoration of the previous
organization with just the DD/P and COP in the line of command
in the front office will result in a clear delineation of responsibili-
ties and more efficient operations.
The Staffs
We studied at some length the staffs in the DD/P. We con-
sidered a possible merger of the FI, CI and CA staffs. We also
studied proposals for divesting the staffs of all operational responsi-
bilities. We believe that while both are desirable objectives, neither
are practicable under present circumstances. We therefore urge
that the FI, CI and CA staff functions be drawn closer together
under the Chief of Operations and that these organizations insofar
as practical act in the classical sense as staffs for the DD/P. We
further believe that the Operational Services Staff, the Central Staff,
and the residual of the Cover and Commercial Staff, after the changes
recommended below are completed, be transferred to the Central
Support Staff which is proposed.
-7-
SECRET
14-00000
Merger of Covert Action Staff and International Organizations Division
The DD/P has advised us of his desire to merge the Covert
Action Staff with the International Organizations Division. While
this is contrary to the trend of divesting staffs of operational duties,
we nevertheless do not observe any major reasons against such a
merger and believe that it should be tried out in accordance with
the DD/P's wishes.
Central Support Staff
We recommend that the DD/P draw together into a Central
Support Staff control of personnel and other support matters cur-
rently decentralized to the divisions and staffs in order to locate
these functions directly under him.
Special Task Force Operations
We recommend the creation of an organizational entity to
be known as "Special Task Force Operations" reporting directly
to the DD/P, which shall be activated and deactivated upon need,
and which shall be the command inechanism for handling such
projects as the Cuban operation which demands the creation of an
organization from Agency-wide assets.
-8-
SECRET
14-00000
Assistant to DD/P for Paramilitary and Air Support Operations
We recommend the creation of an office in the DD/P to be
known as Paramilitary and Air Support Operations, under the
direction of an Assistant DD/P, to develop the capability for covert
paramilitary and air support operations. We suggest that the bulk
of this new organization be located at [10] where it will have
facilities for organization and training. Such a move will also relieve
the burden on the headquarters building. We recommend that the
individual to head this organization be drawn from military service
and be a senior Colonel or a Brigadier General with wartime para-
military experience. Having in mind the total disestablishment of
the DPD in its present form, we recommend that the Air Support
Branch of DPD be transferred to the new Paramilitary Office of DD/P.
Domestic Division
We endorse the proposal to create a Domestic Division. We
strongly urge that the new Domestic Division utilize the Contact
Division of 00, which is to be transferred from the DD/I to the DD/P,
as the nucleus for field work in the United States. We also believe
that this Domestic Division should take over those functions of the
Cover and Commercial Staff presently carried out by the Commercial
Group, plus all those activities of the Cover Division which involve
-9-
SECRET
14-00000
all matters involving liaison with the British or with Canadian,
Australian and New Zealand intelligence services except matters
concerned with Sigint and Comsec. Further, this officer should
have full control authority over liaison exchange of information
with the British and the above mentioned Commonwealth services;
and all other components of the Agency, including the DD/I, should
keep this officer advised on a daily basis of liaison relations with
the British services.
War Plans
Because of the vital importance of war plans to the Agency's
relations to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, we recommend that the War
Plans Group receive direct support from the DDCI, even though it
should remain organizationally as a part of the Central Support Staff
of the DD/P.
Police Programs
We are convinced that United States Government support to
the police in friendly nations can provide great benefits to the
United States and that some of these benefits will assist CIA in its
work. The President has recently indicated to AID that he wishes
this program to receive strong support. We believe that CIA should
-
12 -
SECRET
14-00000
give it greater support than it has previously received. We recom-
mand that the police group in the CI Staff receive such augmentation
as is necessary, and that Project ENDOMORPH (police training
school) be transferred from the NE Division to the CI Staff.
Liaison with Department of State
We urge that the DD/P centralize liaison with the Department
of State and maintain careful records of all discussions between the
Agency and State Department officials. We note that nearly every
area division chief has a weekly meeting with his counterpart in the
Department but that under the present system there is no organized
method for keeping the central management of the DD/P informed
of what takes place at these meetings.
Advice to State on Black Propaganda
We recommend that the DD/P develop procedures which will
insure that other appropriate agencies of the government (Department
of State, Defense, White House and USIA) are kept appropriately
informed of black propaganda activities which otherwise might be
misunderstood and believed to be legitimately the views of a foreign
power. We have in mind our discussions with the Department which
heard expressed concern that the Department was unaware of certain
black propaganda activities relating to Communist China and conse-
quently was led astray.
- 13
SECRET
14-00000
CIA Personnel Under State Cover
We recommend that CIA personnel under the Department of
State cover make greater efforts to truly live their cover. We believe
in this connection that the DCI should receive assurances from the
DD/P, after proper study, that CIA allowances for rents, servants
and entertainment are in line with comparable State Department
allowances.
"Legitimate" Foreign Service Cover
We recommend that the Agency more and more place people
under Foreign Service cover by the "legitimate" method of recruiting
individuals, having them take and pass the Foreign Service exams
and be commissioned in the Foreign Service and follow through a
normal Foreign Service career. CIA should obviously keep the ?
Department advised concerning these individuals, work with the
Department on their assignments which will be mutually beneficial,
and covertly train them. By this method such individuals will be
under true Foreign Service cover and will not only be unknown to
other intelligence services, but also to their colleagues in the
Foreign Service. I
- 14 -
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Watch Committee report, circulate it to all agencies for considera-
tion prior to discussion at the Watch Committee meeting when it
could be decided upon in final form and reproduced and disseminated.
Related to the Watch Committee -- but also an important aspect
of all coordinated intelligence community reports -- we believe that
substantive disagreements should be encouraged and even spelled
out in Watch Committee reports; that NIEs and SNIEs rather than
being suppressed or covered by watered down language as is some-
times the case today, in all cases should reflect the consensus of
views of the intelligence community. If there are differing minority
views on the part of one or more agencies, including CIA, these
should be spelled out in appropriate footnotes.
CIA Relations with the Department of State
We examined the relations of CIA with the Department of State.
Several matters of concern in this area are mentioned in the section
on the DD/P. We would note that "covering" for the Agency poses
certain problems for the Department in its relations with the Congress.
These include such items that attract Congressional interest as:
the number of officers in each Embassy, particularly the political
section; the designation of CIA officers as FSRs; the CIA role in
-33
-
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
handling State communications, etc. In these areas we recommend
close liaison be maintained with State on Congressional matters and
that whenever possible State be given a helping hand with the appro-
priate Congressional committees on these matters.
We are particularly concerned that the Foreign Service designa-
tions of CIA personnel under State cover, particularly FSR, are so
revealing. We recommend that the Agency arrange with State to
cover CIA personnel equally with FSS and FSO designations.
The Department of State indicated concern about the level in
CIA on which Comint policy matters are handled, and also noted that
on occasions there appears to be lack of coordination within CIA on
Comint policy matters. This factor is one of the reasons why we
recommend raising the level of Sigint policy matters to the Assistant
to the DCI for Coordination and Intelligence Community Guidance.
State's Counter Communism Office
We reviewed with some interest the proposed creation in the
office of the Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs of the
Department of State of a strategy group for combatting communisım.
While the full scope of its function is as yet unclear, we believe that
CIA should follow the developments in this office closely as its
activities will have considerable bearing on the work of the Agency.
-34
-
SEPDES
14-00000
State's Operational Center
We reviewed with some interest the embryonic operational
center which the Department of State is developing. We found that
this is an interesting development and would obviously have bearing
on the intelligence community.
State at White House Briefings
We recommend that in accordance with the present practice of
a representative of the Defense Intelligence Agency attending the
briefings of the White House staff by CIA, that a representative of
the Department of State also be invited to attend these meetings.
Receipt of Top Classification Messages
We recommend that the DCI take up directly with the President
the problem of receiving all pertinent messages dealing with foreign
affairs which might have any bearing on intelligence estimates or
reports, or on covert operations. We have particularly in mind
such communications as between the President and Khrushchev, etc.
We believe that it is important for the DCI to see such messages in
order to give proper guidance to the intelligence and operational
activities of the Agency.
- 35
-
SMOCT
14-00000
THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON
April 3, 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Lyman B. Kirkpatrick
Inspector General
Central Intelligence Agency
In the course of our discussions as members of Mr. McCone's
Working Group on Intelligence and in our March 28 meeting with
Messrs. McCone and Carter, I indicated that I did not concur
in the "Coordination" section of the draft report which we
discussed with the DCI and the DDCI.
In line with the foregoing, it would be appreciated if
you would:
1) Amend the second sentence of the section to read:
"With the exception of Mr. Coyne, we are fully in accord."
2) Add at the end of the section a new paragraph
reading as follows:
"Mr. Coyne does not concur in this recommenda-
tion. He disagrees with (a) the proposed
organizational placement and title of the recommended
Office, because this would perpetuate the present
ineffective arrangement of the Coordination Office
now in existence and would not provide the recommended
Office with the stature required to assist the DCI
in fulfilling his heavy responsibilities throughout
the Intelligence Community; (b) the limitations in
the functional concepts of the Office, as outlined
above. Further, he does not concur in this recommenda-
tion because it does not distinguish sufficiently
the internal CIA operating functions of the DDCI
from the community-wide functions which the recommended
Office must perform if the DCI is to execute
effectively his principal mission as assigned in
the President's Directive of January 16, 1962.
Mr. Coyne believes that if the Office is established
along the lines recommended above, it will be in-
capable of effectively assisting the DCI in performing
his principal Presidentially-assigned responsibilities
of (a) coordinating and effectively guiding the total
U. S. foreign intelligence effort; (b) establishing
necessary policies and procedures to assure adequate
coordination of foreign intelligence activities at
14-00000
"with the heads of the Departments and Agencies
concerned, of the programs and activities of all
U. S. agencies engaged in foreign intelligence
activities; and (d) assuring efficiency and
effectiveness, and avoiding undesirable duplication
in the total foreign intelligence effort. Mr.
Coyne will submit his recommendations on this
subject at a later date."
I would appreciate receiving a copy of the revised report
of the Working Group at your earliest convenience.
-
2-
J. Patrick Coyne
14-00000
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
23 October 1962
Cond
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT:
10/25/62
After Action Report on the Findings
of the Working Group