14-00000,
104-10226-10117
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTED ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MENBERS
FILE-TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: 100-5-1
INCLUSIVE DATES:
NG. 62- DEC. 6.3
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY: THIRD AGENCY MATERIAL
DATE
DATE
RECEIVED RETURNED REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIA
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR RENOVED FROM THIS FILE
14-00000
Pre-dates
HSCA request
(all 3il Agency)
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED.
SUBJECT: (Ophonal)
FROM:
DC,/03/JPriebe
TO: (Officer designation, room number, and
building)
1.
INTERNAL
USE SALY
CONFIDENTIAL
SVIRU
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
EXTENSION
NO
3441
DATE 30 July 1963
SECRET
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED
FORWARDED
30/7 2
COMMENTS (Humber each comment to show tham shu
to whom, Draw a line across column after each comment
DO/SR
2. DO/SAT
3.
4.
SR/CI/BBright
Joon
AU
18
5.
2- This information was sent to
CI Staff recently and has
probably teen forwarded to you
for renly. Though you mint
be able to use this extra copy,
12.
6.
7.
CSR/CI/K
Dolores
8.
Cu CLLARGED FROM RID/FI
OR
EE/G/CE-wagen 19/8 tonate in memo...
SR/C1/A20
Joon
9.
SR/CI/K
Schroeden apparent BIND
10.
Sou, ausach.Cous
approach a subra quent
:
11.
Felfe bowe spotid o
11GB?
8 to 9: Looks like RIS was
on him
(KJ
first, but they
have sent
Falfr (or another)
they simy
attehyet.
2015
INTERNAL
UNCLASSIFIED
USE ONLY.
15.
RIDIAN
-RI/MIS
RID/files
3-62
610
AISE PREVIOUS
EDITIONS
کو
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
at him for
a
else
secrintment attit
fiti
Tol
100-5-/
14-00000
다
CLOFET SENSITIVE
/10571
i
5 July 6
Chief, Cl Utaff/L
2 C 48 Про
Chief, Contact Division, 00
Attempted Ris Panetration of bell telestias Laboratories -
10612
7/22
1. Attached are to szorunda, dated a Jame 1963, from
car Bew York Field Offics eceterning apparont Ria interest
in Manored R. Behrcoder end Donald 8. Thomas, Bell Pelephons
Laboratories, Murray Hill, Hew Jersey. We beliove this informa
tien should be passed to the FI immediately. We would ap
preciate baing edrized the date this information is foranted
to the Deresu.
2. For your information, persission to brief Dr. Schroeder
prior to his trip to the UUBil ves rogssted by our Rew York
Office but refused by FI Staff. In view of his employant, bow
evar, and previous CD/00 contacts with him, FI recommended ba
bo provided with a strong defensive end realities briefing.
2268.
3. Further inquiry may be directed to Mrs. Shirley Stetson,
cn/08, Depart Branch, Boon 413, 1717 8 Street, H. W., extension
Cano. 7701
1816 3
Reales As stated above
SBStetson/m
80 100
Για
1100-5-1
K. M. ASECRAFT
:
30 JULY 63
:
SECRET
CS COPY
100-5-1
SENSITIVE 11110110
-
14-00000
SECRET
'UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
TO
Attn
:
DATE:
1 July 1963
Chief, Contact Division
: Mc Connell/Czajkowski/Lincoln Staff
FROM : Chief, New York Office
SUBJECT: Attempted R.I.8. Penetration of Bell Telephone Labs
:
Ref: I Reports 2988-3 and 2989-3
1. We thought the attached reports would be of interest to Lincoln
Staff from a Soviet realities standpoint. We also felt that they should
be brought to the attention of Division management because the M.O. out-
lined therein is becoming a major factor in dealing with sources who have
contact with Sovbloc nationals. It has been our experience that the type
of activity outlined has been on a mrked increase, particularly since
the establishment of the KGB 10th Directorate. Although such activity
by Sov legals is taking place throughout the continental U.3., undoubtedly
its greatest impact is being felt in the New York and Washington, D.C.
areas because of the large Soviet Government establishments in both of
these cities. For this reason it would seem imperative that both WAFO
and NYFO be extremely vigilant for such activity in companies and insti-
tutions with which they are dealing in order that it may be recognized
in its earliest stages and appropriate CI/CE countermeasures instituted.
In order to assist other offices in this respect, we plan to write in the
near future an article for the Division Newsletter, outlining some of our
experiences along these lines.
2. We were somewhat disappointed in CI Staff's reaction to our
recent request for assistance in defensive briefing of the subject of
one of the attached reports. It seems to be quite clear now that our
original assumption concerning his being R.I.S. targeted was quite correct
and that there is a strong likelihood that his current trip behind the
Curtain vill be utilized by the opposition for provocation and/or an
actual recruitment attempt. We wonder in future cases of this nature
exactly what support we may expect from Angleton's shop. Although we
feel that we have a fair capability for handling such matters here in
New York, we do admit that, at least on this one, we would have felt
slightly more comfortable had a CI specialist been along, if for no other
reason than to preclude any possible Monday morning quarterbacking by the
"old pros."
SECRET
10612
Embeded wes astseatis
dungrating an
:
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
Subject: Attempted R.I.S. Penetration of Bell Telephone Labs
3. Judging by the attached material, it would appear that, despite
established Bell policy (see our 16 May memorandum re Case 39,790), the
opposition has seen fit to deflower at least two of Bell's scientific
virgins. We serjously wonder at this point just how many other Bell
people might be in the same boat. Perhaps, as a result of all this,
some representation by Bell management to the KGB will be forthcoming,
spelling out to that organization, as was spelled out to our own, estab
lished company policy pertaining to such matters. In any event, it would
appear that at least one or two Bell scientists, and there are probably
more, have been giving the R.I.S. more cooperation and reporting than the
Agency. Let's hope that in the near future Bell management takes some
effective steps to rectify this rather ludicrous, and patently dangerous,
situation.
JAY
JAY B. L. REEVES
Attachments: M Reports 2988-3
and 2989-3
Chagle/ng
10612
SECRET
14-00000
Memorandum
SEROBICE
TO
Attn
: Chier, Contact Division.
: Support (Chirley Stetson)
FROM
DATE. 26 Ju
Chief, New fork Office
ZA
Apparent KIS Interest in anfred Pr
stapper:
Bell Telephone La>
201-734194
(201-734194)
1
:
11 0930-1230 hours 14 June, Manfred A. Schroeder of Bell Labs
received a strong defensive briefing in correction with his June -
July trip to the USSK and sulguria (see our 7ay Coordination Out-
line for subject). During Schroeder's briefing, Nagle elicited
from him that prior to a trip to the USSR in 1959 he had been con-
tacted by an individual who represented himsel se a West Germaτι
Intelligence Officer. More important, we also learned that, ut
about the same time, RIS cultivation of Schroeder apparently began.
2. Concerning the West German approach, Schroeder indicated
that his mother, who resides in Hamburg, wa, telephoned in 1959 by
an individual who claimed to be an old acqur.intance of her son's
and who was interested in contacting hin concerning employment in
the US. The caller left a phone number and said that he would ap-
preciate il if Schroeder could call him neze time he was in Haaturg.
Schroeder's mother relayed the message to her con, and, as requested,
he telephoned the caller just prior to his ン USSR junket. The
individual he called identified himself as a West German intelligence
Officer and said that he would like to oder as coon as
possible. Schroeder agreed. When they met, the individual in question
(Schroeder does not recali his name) presented suitable credentiale
and expressed interest in Senroeder's trip to the USSR. According to
Schroeder's account, the West German Intelligence Officer gave him the
old "keep your eyes and ears open" pitch, and old him that he would
contact him in the first West German city in which he touched down
after his USSR trip. Schroeder was conducted in Stuttgart promptly
after returning to Germany from the US on his way back to the US.
Because of his US employment and the fact that Bell paid for his trip,
Schroeder became very apprehensive about any further contact with the
West German service and at the time of the call indicated that he had
nothing to say and wanted no further contact. Other than the cursory
examination of credentials (us reported above), Schroeder made no
attempt to establish the bona fides of the German who made the approach.
We pointed out to Schroeder the unlikely possibility that the approach
might not have been Lone fide and might, in fact, have been a provo-
cation.
* Cogheytached.
i
SECRET
SENSITIVE
10612
Exclude: a
14-00000
SENSITIVE
いこ Appa interest an
3. Apparently .I.S. ultivation אישי
prior the above Incident. According to hist
ceived what appeared to be a routine invitation vis
acoustics Ocilities in Mosconti lengrad in a
connection witi. the invitin wrote. Sav
that during his visit he would like to m
Sov acoustics engineer who was very interest
and ind done sever Russian trainlong of
a result of this corresponience, Scaronder receives
ut his home a couple of days prior ti dejartey
from an individual who lede
In New York. The caller told me int
2
de haure
I:.
αγ.τ,
MOS
Tor delivery this spel
1
TAL
of the Stat
Cort.10.
caller, whose na Schect
Like to deliveα. μ.
:
Schroeder in a vas
ون
which he had t
1,
S
a:i
31
thor comida
L
٢٢٥٠
ti
Lastruc
liver t..
י
finally agreed to inves
the
:
up the invitation.
nta
٠٢٠
4
Schroeder Lavis: Stever
favtar
hase
the latter decid, wever, said that sched to as in
an area closed to trave: Sop
say event,
the Sov arranged to senders
Chathan, New Jersey, and at that titl tler to her th
for her husband.
!!
4. Schroder said that his wit to the NSR was quite
routine and that he cold recull nothing but
salary happ
during the triy. Dring the vi. is, als do cert,
speaks fluent German, acted as his hot and was
continually.
t
KGB Shined.
WYSA
5.Sometim in 1 Peuroedor received a call
one evening from Vladimir Mentificers
sentative of Amtors a
volgin said that Samola Priem
Purduev hai just completed a visit to ew York ... Secore maring the
city had asked him to deliver a present to Schroder for an, hence
the phone call. Volgin insisted on delivering the present to moeder
in person, and the two made arrangements to have has togeth ne
following week in Maniattan. This began a series approximately si
SECRET
SENSITIVE
10612
14-00000
SENSITIVE
Subject: Apparent citeres in anfred. Sein "d",
l Telephone L
or more contacts with
received a cute from Voigts statis that me and
ing to the USSH. 1. crder that his we could mate
there. lucidentally, Schroedera puly other contact
in 1962 when he met alm in Copenhagen at ap: 10
ted
when Sca
wor
trac
mnt..
6. Schroeder said that act, if not all. of Volgn's phone!:
to him were to his he and usually spisarea to have bem de fr
pay phones. Schroeder seld that is met with volineste
lunches and dinners in Manhattan, och at a wr: I.R.E.
Meeting, theater, a entertainment cach other in thely respectiv
homes. Schroeder Jahas that his wife neconjunted him in most ot
his contact with Volgin. Other tisu to his own family, Velgii. never
introduced Schroeder to any other
wividuals.
T. Schroeder claims that on couple of decasions le tuned over
1.1
unclassified technical papers too, wie Staimed to be an
engineer. Schroeder can't recall whether Volgin specifically requested
the inforantion or whether he turned it over to irin on his own initiative.
At one point during their relationship, Volgin anked Schroeder to walte
an article on US acoustics work for publication it. Soviet technica
Journal. Schroeder declined.
A
T
d. In retrospect Schroeder admitted that he had been quite naive
about his relationship with Volgin and expressed some concern that se
security hadn't been more active in admonishing himgainst devel-
ment of relationships with των Goverment representatives. His view
of his experiences o completely coincides with curs as a result of
our discussion.
:
9. Another factor which obviously enters Cato Scarocder's K.I..
picture is ble vifaa bulgarian extraction. Belveder elatas that
neither he nor, to the best of his knowledge, his we have ever been
approached by Sovbios 'representatives in thi. country concernin; hie
wife's family . Bulgaria. Lewis mother, wanita Mensckik,
inmigrated to the US in April and Lived with Schroeder and his
wife until November 162 when she returned to Sria, apparently because
she was homesick and couldn't nijunt to the new language and life in
the US. Schroeder said that his mot-1-law's original exit visa
request was rejected in 1958 by tar Blgarian Government, but after he
and his wife wrote several letters to the Bulgarian Foreign Ministry
she was finally granted permission to leave in 160.
SECRET
V
SENSITIVE 10612
r
1
1
14-00000
SECRET
SENSITIVE
4-
Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Manfred R. Schroeder,
Bell Telephone labs
1
10. After Schröeder visits the USSR on his current trip, he
plans to fly to Sofia to spend approximately a week with his wife's
family there. Schroeder had not mentioned the Bulgarian visit in
outlining his original itinerary to Bob Martin of this office, there-
fore, it vas not mentioned in Schroeder's Coordination Outline.
11. All of the above would seem to indicate quite strongly that
Schroeder, as we originally surmised, has been targeted by R.1.3. In
briefing Schroeder, we ran through some of the typical entrapment
situations fabricated by the opposition, e.g., women, homosexuals,
purchase of drugs for Sov citizens, black market activity, acceptance
of letters to mail outside the USSR, commitments to disaffected Sovs,
etc. In addition, we stringently admonished Schroeder against any
notetaking or photography which could in any way be construed as com-
promising. We also alerted Schroeder to the fact that some attempt
might be made to use his wife's family as leverage in a recruitment
attempt. In this connection, we pointed out to Schroeder that there
was a strong likelihood that the R.I.S. and/or Bulgarian service would
make an approach to him during his forthcoming visit to Sofia. An
approach in Bulgaria would give the Sovs an opportunity for disavowal
and also would provide the proper setting for maximum utilization of
relatives. When Schroeder mentioned that his sister-in-law, FNU
Mensckik, had indicated several times in the past that she would like
to leave Bulgaria, we strongly admonished him against making any com-
mitments to her, pointing out that she may possibly be co-opted by
the opposition. We told Schroeder that any representations to gain
an-exit visa for his sister-in-law should be channeled through the
US Legation in Sofia. Schroeder was told that, if any pressure were
applied concerning his wife's family, his best reaction would probably
be a noncommittal, "I'll think it over when I get home:" All in all,
we alerted Schroeder as best we could to the opposition M.O. and pre-
pared him on how best to avoid some of the not so obvious pitfalls
which might be in store for him.
12. Prior to our briefing of Schroeder, Bob Martin alerted Bell
management to all of the ramifications of Schroeder's travel behind
the Curtain. The management was informed by Martin that ve felt it
our obligation to point out to them the strong possibility that Schroeder
had been targeted in order that they would have all of the facts avail-
able before signing off on his trip.
SECRET
SENSITIVE
10612
14-00000
SECRET
SENSITIVE
-5-
Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Manfred R. Schroeder,
Bell Telephone Labs
13. Assessment of Schroeder: Subject, a very accomplished
scientist, heads up all acoustics research at Bell. He reads
Kussian and is fluent in German, French, Spanish, Italian, Dutch,
and English. He impresses us as being a rather savvy, discreet,
cooperative, mature, stable, well motivated individual. We attri-
bute Schroeder's apparent lack of discretion in his dealings with
the Bovs more to the subtlety of the Sov approach than to his own
naivete. It has been our experience that most US businessmen and
scientists are very susceptible and vulnerable to the opposition
approach mainly due to somewhat of a lack of realistic public
education.concerning contacts with Bovbloc nationals. We feel
that Schroeder's degree of cooperativeness with US services has
been enhanced considerably by his feeling that he has really been
taken for a ride by the opposition.
Incidentally, when we asked subject for permission to release this
information with source disclosure to the FBI, he was at first some-
what apprehensive and expressed the desire to talk it over with one
of his Bell superiors before he made any commitments. He finally
agreed, however, when we convinced him that it would certainly be in
his best interest to get on record with the FBI as soon as possible.
Most of his apprehension about the FBI seemed to be attributable to
the fact that he has just been granted US citizenship and, in addition,
18 now somewhat concerned that his activities with the Sove in some
way may effect his security status which in turn could be very detri-
mental to his career.
Based on our limited contact with Schroeder, we have every reason to
believe that he would be suitable for operational use, should the
bureau choose to pursue such a course.
14. We would strongly recommend that all of the above be passed
to the Bureau ASAP in order that that organization may effect contact
with Schroeder and provide him with proper guidance concerning any
further approaches by Sor or Bloc nationals in this country.
;
Magle/ng
JAY BY REEVES
CENCITTUE
SECRET 106
14-00000
2.
زر Anin. Geronty.
ن
tizomerie.....
C. valp heas comm.
صدرالدورة for sur le 22 January 1563.
3. A: CAL
Al..se. Jev je say
Ilatov nas:
incoratorias.
Muny Mill, Bou Saraey
Boad Aonos les binoanrch
5. Dung: Juhfest vill tentatively Abyart Us 18 May,
ng
1
Brasov 19 Hay. Jo vel spend tard veeks visiting Inve
1. How and bonisgrad at the invitation of D. Ovie,
Deputy Chairman, stats and thee fur Coordination of
Scientific Rescured. If they dy arrival date 1.8 wh
acceptable to the Borless, aub joas vild make the trip in
Jums or July.
"
6. Дерея Daring Revesber 1968, vedie La Parepa, sat jeet
resolved ea invitation from the USER Academy of Deleuce
so vists varioss Revies acoustic laboratories. Esonu se
of a sight schedule as she time subject @calized the
Loviestics. Is carly March of this year he received the
Invitation from Orisbient meationed above.
Duri ale trip, jest vill disousa vith Sortet courter
parts various aspects of voice comuniosticas recoarch,
electrumsoustics, and arquitectural acoustics. Be vi
al visit Soviet laboratories Levalved in researc
thope flolds.
7. Oppurity Statual Dubject was granted wores aleareone by Ridlintova
Air Material Command 30 July 1936 in anticipation of his
being used on alassified project at Bell Laboratories.
Alisa mama check on subjoos peading.
8. Dondove Jutellinga A
1999 cab joot vas conserted wios
by
Lark Hold office for inbriefing after a trip
to the U. At the time he was generally cooperative,
106/2
!
?
:
:
*
but somevius aprabonsive. He was again soatasted in
lyue for worlofing subsequent to a 08 visit of a dovlet
counterpart.
7. Inatime on Friedy in Dental Arvo. Dubject's wife was
barm in bifia, larte. He now reportedly bal bol de
aitina.ship. Ir. Yorder 12 abort sanaged to
arrang far imipation د وتا مضاf his accher-La-Law,
Irawal's mackis. After a shirt stry in tale pouziwy,
bowever, she returned to her home 1: Bofia in March 1563.
In addition to his mother-in-las, proovanbly there are
other relatives of his vitaill living in Daigaria.
10. Estent of Poolaya Prato Panded me 13-18 0 1999
adject vialeed acousties Lacazeeries la Roccer and
Leningrad.
11. ALZA of Don't be a very competent
ecousilos saleskies. Na renda Russian end to fluent is
Games, Persia, Romainia, Italian, Etek cod Ragi.
18. of real Anna Bearing var comment liaited re
Lexicasais vita and joos ha has given every indication
of being dieurces, security sensatous, mere, and
comparative.
13. Peter of the Fotob be
will not be briefed on ogeratios of any
klad. Ho photography or Leariainating note taking vil
be requested ef hin.
14. A pod Radisson dating sajeet vill ressive routine
defensive cod Sovolos realities briefing.
15. а яка в Dorama: Briefing vill be condasted by
Ca/00 Baw Lark Hold Orrios personnel.
16. Dating of reject's trip will be funded by his cagany.
17.
Men at 15 y 1963.
14-00000
--
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
SECRET
SENSITIVE
TO : Chief, Contact Division
Attn
FROM
: Support (Shirley Stetson)
: Chief, New York Office
OF
ME Apparent RIS Interest in Donald E. Thomas,
Bell Laboratories
DATE: 26 June 1963
00-A-3266992
(NY-29883)
DITUSA
Scientist
BRILLABORATUOS. CAT
1. During routine debriefing of Donald E. Thomas of Bell Labora-
tories in connection with his recent USSR visit to attend the Poyov
Society Meeting, 5-14 May, Moscow (see NYOR 8878 for Coordination Out-
713 line) subject mentioned having had recent contact with a Soviet Govern-
ment representative in this country. The Soviet in question identified
Chimself to Thomas as Gleb Aleksi Pavlov and gave his address as 1216
First Avenue, Manhattan.
2. According to Thomas, his initial contact with Pavlov took
place in late March following the International Convention and Show
of the I.B.Ε.Ε., 25-29 March, New York City (see Case 39843). At the
convention Thomas became friendly with two Soviet counterparts in
attendance, A. V. Tiel and Anatole Trutka, both of whom Thomas invited
to his home for a social visit during their US stay. When the Sovs
departed for home following the convention, Thomas saw them off at New
York International Airport. It was at the airport that he first met
Pavlov, who apparently was seeing off all of the Sov I.E.E.E. delegates.
After the Sov delegation had departed, Thomas and Pavlov returned to
Manhattan together and, on parting, exchanged addresses.
3. A couple of weeks after their initial meeting, Pavlov tele-
phoned Thomas at his home and told him that Tiel and Trutka had asked
him to send their warmest regards to Thomas and thank him for the
hospitality which he showed them during their trip to this country.
During the conversation, Pavlov expressed an interest in renewing his
acquaintance with Thomas, and suggested that he would enjoy visiting
him at his home in Madison, New Jersey. Thomas said that he would
enjoy seeing Pavlov, but that he was currently preparing to leave on
a trip to the USSR and Europe and was not scheduled to return to the
UB until late May. Thomas suggested that, in view of this, perhaps
early June would be a good time for them to plan on getting together.
Pavlov replied that he, himself would be in the USSR then, but would
contact Thomas when he returned in early July. Incidentally, Pavlov's
* copy attached
SECRET
SENSITIVE 10612
680071
Excleted tron astamate
:
14-00000
SECRET
SENSITIVE
-2-
Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Donald E. Thomas,
Bell Laboratories
1:201
phone call to Thomas was made on a pay phone. In fact, when the opera-
tor cut in for overtime, Thomas called Pavlov back at the pay phone.
Thomas mentioned that he possibly might have the phone number written
down somewhere.
4. Boon after the phone call from Pavlov, Thomas called John
McVicker of the State Department and inquired if any clearance of
Pavlov's proposed trip to his home in Madison would be necessary.
McVicker told Thomas that any such clearances were Pavlov's worry
and that he need not be concerned about. same.
9. During his recent trip to the USSR, it would appear that
Thomas vas exposed to two incidents which possibly could have been
of opposition fabrication. One involved an approach by a Soviet
interpreter by the name of FNU Petrov, who took Thomas aside and
asked him if he could do him a personal favor by getting him a sub-
scription to National Geographic Magazine for which he, Petrov, would
reimburse Thomas in rubles. Thomas politely refused.
A Moscowy USSR
Sent CIIVEER
6. The other incident involved Thomas being photographed with
Lan attractive young female Interpreter, Ludmilla Oshkina. According
to Thomas, when one of the Soviets in their party vas about to take
a picture of him standing next to Ludmilla, another individual stand-
ing nearby vas pushed out of the way apparently so that he would not
be included in the photograph. In addition, Ludmilla attempted to
strike an affectionate pose with Thomas for the photograph by slipping
her arm through his. Thomas claims to have pushed her arm avay just
as the photo was being snapped.
:
7. Assessment of Thomas: Subject strikes us as being extremely
naive and unrealistic. He appears to be more apprehensive about his
dealings with CIA than his dealings with Soviets. In fact, when Thomas
was asked if he would mind if a tape recorder vere used for debriefing,
he became very nervous and expressed a fear that, if such a tape vere
made, perhaps the Soviets might gain access to it and use it against
him in some way at a future date.
Thomas had an outline in his own handwriting of the sessions of the
Popov Society Meeting. When we asked for a photostat of same, he
again expressed misgivings and indicated that he would prefer to have
a typewritten copy prepared for us instead of a copy in his own hand-
vriting because he was fearful that it might fall into Soviet hands..
1
SENSITIVE 10612
:
14-00000
SECRET
SENSITIVE
-3-
Subject: Apparent RIS Interest in Donald E. Thomas,
Bell Laboratories
We inquired of Thomas why he had not mentioned Pavlov to us during our
defensive briefing of him before his trip. He replied rather nebulously
that it was his understanding that it was company policy that our oniy
function in seeing him before his trip was to give him a defensive brief-
ing, and that, since no debriefing was involved at the time, he felt no
obligation to volunteer the information concerning Pavlov.
It is our opinion that Thomas's obvious naivite, apparent lack of sophisti-
cation, and extreme apprehension concerning dealings with our Agency would
make him most unsuitable from the standpoint of operational utilization
by the Bureau.
8. We would strongly recommend that all of the above be passed to
the Bureau ASAP in order that that organization may effect contact with
Thomas in time to provide him with proper guidance concerning any further
approaches by Pavlov or other Sov legals in US.
J.J. Comma
B. L. REEVES
Hiagle/ng
SECRET
SENSITIVE 10612
14-00000
SECRET
1 May 1963
Coordication outlias - Donald E. Rasas, Ball Las
Face Boy Took Field Office
Following is ecordinsties-outline for D. B. emas. Dr. W. O.
{
:
Bahar requested that Thomas be given defensive briefing by us before
gming behind Curtain. As you are already care, Babar is Vice President
at Bell Labs and member of President'a Boientific Mvisory Commail and
President's Intelligamse Esord.
1. Eames Dewald Bigar T
8. Sato and Finse of Births 18 May 1907, Essover Bouaship, Peans.
3. Base and Addresai 4 Fairvice Avesses, Hadises, Eav Jersay.
Flace of eploysent and positions Bell Labe, Murray Rill, Dew
Jereay Electronics Baginear.
5. Itinerary Banjost departs 33 ay for Macoow to attend
Popov Cusioty marting, 5-14 May. Pellowing Moscow nesting
be will visit labs in Fostara Burope for approximately one
vest.
6. Mission and reason for trips Bojest vas invited to give
Jager at Pogov resting by Asadesy of Golemees via
1.5.8.8. (International leseroads and Mestrical Enginsara).
7. Besurity Statas, Do hold favorable FAC ecpletion en och jest
dated if Bia 19.
8. Previous Datelligence Activities: Dhjet me contestsi by
02/09 1998-99 ccsseraing inte en bevist sork in his field
thick be coquired from osstects with Borist einmitia
counterparts attending international meeting in W.
9. Relctives de eloss friends in dested arenas Eme.
10. Entsat of previous twipe to denied areas: Fans.
11. Analysis of Baject's Competences Pa. State College, B.8.,
B.8., 1991 Calmbia University, H.A., 1938, US Army Sigmal
Sorya, 1940-44 UEAAY, 1944-46, en radio countermeasures,
1944-551 Posired 14. Col. SAPS Husher (Civilica)penal ca
Lestrenie Goustarasamures RAD Board, Page of Patense, 1948-53.
18. Res of perssaal assezmest: Earing car limited raisticship
ith saject, he has given every indication of being diserest,
pesurity concious, cooperativo, sell arsimtel,
is wall regarded in his particular field of cargate
Ea
13. of matkative briefing proposed and reptressats to leviedı
Jest will not be bridd a operatiese of any kind.
Bo photography er inarintasting note taking will be requested
14. Batescava and realities briefings joat will receive routine
Aptanadvo and Evalos realities briefing.
15. Funding for trips abject's trip will be fended by his ecmpany.
Big effies and partiatpenses Briefing will be cominsted by
Eve Fat Office paremmal.
17. Gcordiastien Osadlinos & may 1563.
SECRET
10612
14-00000
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
smal Defense liter
son of att
This material contine inferng the
-18, USC Bacs 791 and 204 on or
C-O-N-F-I-D-8-N-T-1-A-L
COUNTRY USER
BJECT
Alleged House Arrest of Soviet
Baientist, L Chistovich
DATE OF
NO.
July 63
PLACE &
DATE ACO
July 63
REPORT NO,
(x)
NO PAGES
DEFERENCES
(
THIS IS LINEVALUATED INFORMATION
JOURCE: UB citizen, professor in a ti university.
Be is an authority on acoustics.
:
1. I attended the Third International Congress on Acoustics. 1-8 30pt 59,
Stuttgart, West Germany.
2. While at this Congress I met a Soviet female scientist, L (histovich,
who is connected with the Pavlov Institute of Physiolog,