14-00000
104-10119-10182
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR
SUBJECT
:
:
16 February 1970
:
Director of Security
Comments on Manuscript Give Us This Day;
CIA and the Bay of Pigs Invasion by Edward J.
Hamilton
1. This manuscript has evidently been kicking around in publishing
circles since at least mid-1968, presumably without CIA clearance.
William Buckley of the National Review seems to have been "shopping" it
at one point. One publisher rejected it as too "controversial", and noted
its "confidential" nature as well as its potential for libel suits.
2. In the foreword to this manuscript, the author (whom I shall
refer to under his assumed name of Hamilton), describes the book as a
"personal account" of CIA's role in the Bay of Pigs affair in which he was
a sentor-CIA participant for 19 months. He notes in the foreword his hope
that someone would have written this book so that he would not have to do
it; now convinced that, if he does not write it, it will never be written,
he has taken up his pen "reluctantly and in a mood of nostalgic bitterness."
Hamilton states that he has used no official files or documents and has
consulted no one in preparing this work. Where true names are used in
the manuscript for CIA personnel, he writes that they have been publicly
identified before, and in this contention I believe that he is correct, with
the possible exception of Jim Noel, The author's claim that this book
would provide no information not known to Castro's intelligence service,
or that details this late are of no value to the opposition,is, in my view,
seriously open to question.
3. The book is, in general, favorable to CIA actions in the Bay of
Pigs. The villains of the piece are certain liberal figures in the Kennedy
Administration (Schlesinger, Goodwin, Stevenson) and to some extent,
the President himself. In his concluding chapter, the author's bitterness
is undisguised against those in the Administration and the press who took
the opportunity of the Bay of Pigs incident to attack and denigrate CIA.
4. Messrs. Bissell and Barnes and the author's other CIA co-
workers in the Cuban Project, by and large, are given quite favorable
treatment. One exception is General Cabell, whom the author excoriates,
and it is apparent that Hamilton's opinion of Jerry Droller is far from
EYES COLLY
RETURN TO CLA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
مر
:
14-00000
I
EYES ONLY
-2-
03
favorable, both on political and professional grounds. Jint Noel also
comes out poorly.
3. It is apparent that Hamilton feels very deeply about the Bay of
Pigs and its aftermath, to the extent that he is willing to put his career
on the line by circulating this manuscript to several publishers without
apparent clearance or authorisation. He has utilised as his nom de plume plum
the special name assigned to him in the project for dealing with the Caban
Frente, and it would not take anyone who was involved in the Cuban Project:
more than a few pages of reading to identify the author, as one potential
publisher pointed out. The manuscript manusc itself is the most comp comprehensive
story of a CIA operation that has ever been written for publication to
my
knowledge. Meetings, conversations, and internal and external CIA
actions are here reported extensively and with all the suthority of an
"Insider" who was there. It far exceeds in detall anything that has been
written on the Bay of Pigs, including Charles Murphy's article in Fortune
of September 1961 or the "insider" books that were published following the
death of President Kennedy.
6. Attached herewith is a chapter-by-chapter description of the
nanuscript particularly as it affects CIA security. This analysis states
what the author states, whether right or wrong. Where I have occasion-
ally added comments of my own, they are in brackets [).
ttachment
As noted above
Walter Plorsheimer
Curator
?
Historical Intelligence Collection
Distribution
w/att.
Orig& 2 - D/Security
2- HIC
SECRET
EYES ONLY
150
14-00000
EYES ONLY
Chapter I
was
1. The chapter opens in 1956 in Ambassador Gardner's office in Havana,
where a courtesy call was was being paid on the Ambassador by the CIA Central
American and Caribbean Chiefs of Station who are holding their annual regional
meeting. A is noted that one of the reasons for selecting the place of meeting
was the "absence of Communist embassies" (p. 6). The presence of Col. J.C.
King, Division C Chief, is mentioned. Col. King remarks that Castro was
"beavily involved in the Bogotaso, setting the stage for Hamilton's subse-
quent comment. [Actually Castro played a junior role in the Bogotaso, and
it was after the Bay of Pigs that Mr. Dulles assigned Hamilton the talk of
determining Castro's role in the Bogotazo.] (p. 7). Hamilton states that in
the subsequent three years, while funds were being collected in South America
for Castro's 26th of July Movement, there were no orders from CIA Head-
quarters to penetrate pro-Castro groups abroad (p. 10). He then states that
In March 1960 he was "having coffee with the newly-elected president of the
country to which I was assigned." (p.10) (This could reveal the author's
relationship with President Nardone of Uruguay Uruguay who
who became President in
Dearly March 1960
2. Mr. Richard Bissell and Mr. Tracy Barnes are mentioned and
the author adds that he had worked with Barnes as a member of the team
that ousted President Arbens from Guatemala (p.11). At this point Hamilton
is
recalled to Headquarters to become Chief Chief of Political Action in an
Eisenhower-approved project to assist Caban exiles in overthrowing Castro.
His duties would include organising Cuban leaders into a government-in-
exile which would form a provisional government in Cuba when Castro was
forced out. Hamilton's bass was to be in Costa Rica, provided ex-President
Pepe Figueres could obtain Costa Rican agreement (p.11). (This link could
be quite embarrassing in view of Figueres' recent re-election as President
of Costa Ri
E this point the manuscript introduces the Project Chief as Jake
presumably Mr. Esterline), who is referred to as Jake throughout (p. 12).
We also meet Droller about whom there is some "diversity in attitudes"
among CIA officers. Droller's operational name of Frank Bender is noted (p.13),
and he is referred to as Bender throughout the rest of the manuscript. (This
is not the first time Droller has been Identified as Bender; his name was
blown by Arthur Schlesinger in his book A Thousand Days in 1965.) Bender's
cover telephone arrangements in Miami and New York, which allowed him to
answer local calls there at his Washington desk, are disclosed (p. 14).
Hamilton states that Bender told him that as far as he knew "Richard Helms,
Chief of Operations for the Clandestine Services, had not been cut in" (p. 14).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
20
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-2-
03
Hamilton calls on the Project's Propaganda Chief (presumably
Dave Phillipe), whom he calls Knight throughout, noting that Knight had work
for him on the Guatemala project. He notes that Knight "had spent most of ble
CIA career on the outside, 1.4., under cover", and that he had spent the three
preceding years under cover in Havana. At this point Knight was also estab
lishing a clandestine radio on Swan Island (p. 15). The Paramilitary Chief is
also introduced and is called Ned throughout. (p.15). Nad tells Hamilton that
Caban refugees are being recruited and polygraphed at Useppa Island off Fort
Myer, Florida (p.16). Hamilton is also advised of the role of Roberto Alajo
and of the Retalulehu base in Guatemala; that all this had the consent of
Guatemalan President digoras. (This has all boon en previously published.) (p.1).
Hamilton Usts certain O Cuban leaders, most of whom were bal
scape from Cuba. This Hamil Hamilton considered fronic, because the Chief of
Station, Havana, Jim Wool, and his deputy, Earl Williamson, had been
enthusiastic over Castro while he was in the tro while he was in the Sierra Maestra, a
reated with certain rabel groups ..." (p.17). Hamilton also charges that
Assistant Secretary of State Rubottom and William Wieland "exercised con
siderable influence" over Col. J. C. King (p.18).
Hamilton returned to his station, closed out his affairs and then
Washington. Resigning from the Foreign Service, "my cover
the time", he then flew to Spain to try to defect the Caban military attack
(p. 20)
SECRET
EYES. ONLY
300
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-3-
Chapter II
1. In this chapter Hamilton states that Barnes and others recommended
that he visit Havana, and that the CIA Cover Staff provided him with the docu-
mentation for his operational alias of Edward J. Hamilton which he kept for
the duration of the Project (p. 23). Upon returning from Havana, Hamilton
prepared a report and recommendations. The first recommendation was that
Castro be assassinated before or coincident with the invasion. Hamilton con-
sidered this his principal recommendation, but Barnes would only tell him
subsequently that it was in the hands of a "special group." So far as Hamilton
was able to determins, no plan was ever developed within CIA to assassin
Castro (pp. 30-31). [These.comments would be unfortunate if published, in
view of current charges in the press of various C CIA "assassinations"
Hamilton describes a luncheon that he and Jake had with Brig.
General Robert Cushman, then Assistant for National Security Affairs to
Vice President Nixon. Hamilton had known Cashman when the latter had had
an earlier tour in CIA, and Jake said that Cushman followed the Cuban Pro-
Ject for the Vice President. Hamilton states that Cushman advised him that
Nixon "as Chairman [sic] of the National Security Council, was the real
spark plug behind the project" and the Administration's focal point and trouble-
shooter regarding it. The General gave Hamilton his private telephone
number in the event that he had something for the Vice President's urgent
attention (pp. 31A-32).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
Chapter III (commencing at page 34)
1. As in Chapter II, here again Hamilton's distaste for Bender comes
through. The difference is particularly one of their political philosophies --
Hamilton being quite conservative and Bender being a liberal, Le., Hamilton
was pro-Nixon, Bender apparently anti-Nixon. Hamilton gets the impression
fin both Chapters II and III) that conservative Cuban elements, such as the
business and professional communities, would not be much utilised in the
Project's plans. in Hamilton's view, the emphasis was on atilising Cabans
who had originally supported Castro but who had fled Caba when they became
aware of the the direction in in which the Castro Revolution was moving
with
discusses the main leader
main leaders of the
hom he was to work, work, and their budget (pp. 35-39).
3. Hamilton Hamilton tells of of visiting the Cuban Project headquarters in Coral
Gables, noting the building's disguise as an electronics firm for cover pur-
poses (p. 39), as well as CIA subsidies to Cuban exile groups and newspapers.
In an intra-offices squabble with the paramilitary elements of the Project,
Hamilton leses control of sallitary hardware, a decision he considers basi
cally wrong in that it placed the paramilitary people in charge of what the
Cabans wanted most and thus undercut Hamilton's political action role (pp.42-43).
The bulk of the chapter describes the various members of the Frente including
their idiosyncrasios, as well as some account of those wholwould not joia.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EVES ONLY
Chapter III (commencing at page 45. This is a second Chapter III and
apparently was misnumbered.)
Station
1. The attempt to locate the Frente in Costa Rica having failed, it
was determined to set them up in Mexico City, to which Hamilton and his 16
family now repaired. Hamilton's office was to be independent of the St
and his cover was to be to be that of a fiction writer. Hamilton's use of an
American businessman in Mexico named Sam as his principal manager of
Frente activities, safehouses and the like are described. Here the name of
Manolo Rey is first introduced (pp. 50-52).A
2. Harassment by the th Mexican police and other other authorities, s, includ
ing some attempted surveillance, caused Hamilton to recommend withdrawal
from Mexico. This caused some problem blem because President Eisenhower
wanted the Project to appear as Caban as possible, as possible, which presented diffi-
culties on American soll, However, things proved so difficult in Mexico
that the Frente Trente was moved back to Miami in October 1960. This caused
some personal difficulty to Hamilton because it was impossible to explain
to his young children why he should be living under an assumed name in
Miami. As a result, bigwife and children were forced to come back to
Washington, while Hamilton stayed in Miami.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-5-
Chapter IV
03
1. Mention is made of the training of an exile parachute battalion
in Guatemals. The training was being handled by Calonal Lake (presumably
Lou Rucker] "one of the world's most experienced parachutists" chutists" (p. (p.57).
Mention is also made of Hamilton's assistant, Beraie, who had originally
Joined the Havana police force at CIA request, which ulti ultimately lost him
his U. S. citizenship.(p. 59). CIA funding of the Freate through foreign banks
is noted (p. 60). Some problems with Bender including a security breach,
which came to the attention of the FBI, are mentioned. (p. 60. Ander
security flap is noted (pp. 63-64), when it was discovered that Hamilton's
assistant in Mexico City City had ble briefcase stolen with compromising documei
Hamilton was required by Col. Xing to return to W
statement on his r relations with Sam and also and also possibly to to submit to a polygraph
The resultant resul interview was such that Hamilton became became "convinced of Col.
King's Mill, and never and never spoke to him after him after that" (p. 65). B Hamilton states
that a Marine Colonel named Haskins had been placed in charge of the
Project's paramilitary operations, seconded from the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
He garnered Hamilton's Il-will by refusing to accede to the Treate's request
that they be permitted to visit the training site in Guatemala,
2. There is some mention of relations with the Coast Guard in
Florida in alerting them to those boats which CIA desired to allow to go
through to Caba without being stopped. This chapter also includes the
usual problems of squabbling within the Frente,
SECRET
EYES ONLY
OD
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-7-
Chapter V
1 Hamilton writes in this chapter (p.77), and in several subsequent
chapters, of the general fallure of infiltration efforts into Cuba, the roll-up
of those that got there, and the poor record for delivering supplies to those
anti-Castro guerrillas who might have gotten into Cuba. Maritime operations
also were not very effective.
2. Hamilton underscores the fact that at no meeting of which he was
aware was it asserted that the Cuban underground or population was sched-
aled to play a significant role in the invasion. He notes the many statements
to the contrary that appeared in the press and olsewhere from uninformed
commentators (p. 79). The remainder of The remainder of the chapter describes Hamilton's
views on various members of the Frente, his conversations with them dar-
ing the period bet between the election of 1960 and President Kennedy's Inaugu
ration, during which time a lot of the activity ground to a halt. Hamilton
here also again airs one of his major gripes, namely that the Cuban political
objectives were being continually downgraded in favor of the paramilitary
operations (pp. 92-93).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-8-
Chapter VI
1. In this chapter Hamilton levels some criticism at Ambassador
Bonsal, whom he describes as ineffectual and whom he calls "fumbling
Phil" (pp. 94-95):
03
2. Hamilton describes describes Jim Jim N Noel's arrival at the Miami Base, fol-
lowing the severing of diplomatic relations with Cuba, as "unwelcome",
because he felt him to be "basically either soft on Communism or at least
terribly confused about the issues." (p.96). Hamilton offers his criticism
of Manuel (Manole) Ray because the latter had stayed with Castro too long
and was now sounding a theme of "the revolution betrayed" which was find-
Ing favor at the White House, State and CIA.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
100
:
14-00000
Chapter VII
EYES ONLY
-9-
1. This chapter relates Hamilton's touchy visit, with some members
of the Fronte, to the Guatemala training bases. Their breakfast conversa-
tions with President Ydigoras are described. This breakfast gives the author
a chance to reflect back on the CIA role in the overthrow of Guatemalan
President Arbens. He recalls the three exiled leaders of Guatemala, his
own support for Dr. Cordova to head the new government, and State's veto
of Col. Ydigoras as "vaguely authoritarian." At a crucial moment, however,
Dr. Cordova had to undergo cancer surgery and therefore could not be selected;
the choice fell on Castillo Armas. Now Ydigoras was President but was sub
sequently overthrown because he had done so much for the U. B. and
Cuba (pp. 119-122).
2711
2. Bob Davis, the CIA Chief in Guatemala, is mentioned as a partici-
pant in the breakfast with digoras. [Davis' name has been published
previously.)
3. At the Guatemalan training site, Hamilton refers to being greeted
there by an American Army Lt. Colonel whose name was "Frank." In a
footnote, Hamilton adds that this officer had been detailed to CIA for the
Project, and that "Credible allegations of his actions during the invasion
strongly suggest that he was to some extent mentally unbalanced" (p. 124).
Hostile conversations between Hamilton and "Frank", as well as the initial
unfortunate polemics of Frente chief Tony Varona, are described.
The presence of Green Berets to help in the training of the
Brigade is noted. Colonel Lake's presence and parachute training is again
mentioned (pp. 135-136).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-10-
Chapter VII
1. This chapter describes more conversations regarding internal prob-
lems within the Frente, one of whose members is trying to bring in Manl
Ray (p. 140-145).
2. Hamilton then tells of a meeting with Bissell who said that he was
under White House pressure to broaden the political base of the Frente.
Evidently former Venezuelan President Betancourt, former Costa Rican
President Figueres and Puerto Rican Governor Muñoz Marin were insisting
on the inclusion of of Manolo Ray (p. (p. 146). Schlesinger and Goodwin were also
backing Ray. Hamilton mentioned that the Cubans did not like Ray because
of the lateness with which he broke from Castro (p. 147). Bissell noted
that the Joint Chiefs of Staff wished to send an evaluation team to the training
camps to appraise the state of readiness (p.148).
3. Tracy Barnes takes Hamilton to see Schlesinger at the White House
where the latter is working on his famous White Paper on Caba (p. 151), It
was there that Hamilton learned that Secretary of State Rush had veto'd the
original point of invasion as too "noisy." Ambassador Stevenson joins the
mesting and asks Barnes if everything was going well. Hamilton interprets
this remark as indicating that the Ambassador knew about the invasion plans,
which the latter had subsequently denied. Hamilton also mentions the fact
that Barnes had kept a memorandu memorandum of his briefing of Stevenson before the
invasion (pp. 152-153).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
- 11 -
Chapter I
1. Hamilton states that the Joint Chiefs of Staff assessment team
visited the Guatemalan camps and issued an enthusiastic appraisal as to
the Brigade's training and battle readiness (p. 160). The author notes
that this was important in the light of post-invasion attempts by the
Pentagon to play down their role.
:
2. In a footnote, Hamilton writes that after the invasion Bender
"was galled" by the fact that the exiles referred to him freely, and usually
aunflattering terms (p. 167). Hamilton also adds that he learned that
Jim Noel and Will Carr, "Col. King's crony", were becoming increasingly
active among non-Frente Cabans in Washington and New York (p. 163).
[This presumably cut across Hamilton's political action lines.
3. The remainder of the chapter is-largely taken up with discussions
of intra-Frente problems, with a note of the fact that American infiltra-
tion operations into Cuba had virtually ceased because of their lack of
success.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
:
2ks
14-00000
:
EYES ONLY
-12-
Chapter X
1. This chapter opens with an unsuccessful internal revolt against
President Ydigoras in Guatemala and indicates the desire of the Caban
Frente and some of the Cuban Brigade in Guatemala to come to his ماده
tance. Hamilton relayed this request to Washington, where it was considered
by Bender, Barnas and Dissell, and presumably higher levels, and turned
down (p. 180). Ydigoras succeeded in putting down this revolt. Hamilton
notes that he subsequently learned that several companies of the Brigade
had disobeyed orders, made a show of force at a rabel stronghold and
helped stif stifle the uprising (p. 182).
In mid-March 1961, H Hamilton was summoned ammoned back back to to Washington
to a a meeting with Bissell, Barnes, Jake, Bender and and James J Noel Barnes
pointed out that the White House wanted a broader base in the Fronte, and,
how important it was to the White House to bring Manolo Ray into the picture
Hamilton pointed out that the Cabans disliked Ray and that a large percentage
of the Cabans accepted the Frente. (Noel indicated that Ray was not as bad
as painted, while Hamilten listed the Caban objections to Ray's program
of Castroism without Fidel and the length of time it took Ray to become
diallineloned with Castro. Furthermore, Ray's program did not include
returning to the Cuban Constitution of 1940 which the others all sup
ported (pp. 185-189). As a result of the desire to force Ray into the Frente,
Hamilton resigned his position in Miami and was reassigned. (p. 189). Jim
Noel and Carr) replaced him (p. 190).
SECRET
EYES ONL
4-50
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-13-
Chapter XI
1. Hamilton moved to Washington to assist Knight (presumably Dave
Phillips) in the propaganda work. An attempt to secure Mexican coopera-
tion to obtain a re-fueling stop for the Guatemalan-based aircraft scheduled
to bomb Caba failed because of the venality of a Mexican air force officer
whose price CIA would not meet. In Hamilton's view, this was an error.
2. As the Frente leaders were clamoring for invasion information,
it was determined to bring them to New York and to tell them if they wanted
to learn the assault plans and go to the beachhead, they would have to agres
to remain in Isolation from that date forward. Hamilton stresses the
"voluntary basis for this agreement, to counter later charges that CIA
had kidnapped the Frente and imprisoned them by force (p. 200).
3. With regard to the selection of the Bay of Pigs landing site,
Hamilton states that assault plans were almost entirely in the hands of the
Pentagon (p. 203). Relations with Lem Jones' public relations firm in
Now York are noted (p. 204).
4. A CIA project officer is flown to the Carrier Boxer, flagship of
a naval task force that was assembled in Puerto Rican waters. This
officer was to serve as liaison between the naval task force commander,
CIA Headquarters and the Cuban Brigade (p.205).
SEGRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
-14-
Chapter XII
1. This chapter tells of the initial air raid on Cuba. Ambassador
Stevenson's doubt at the UN as to the origins of the planes are surfaced,
and Barnes and Hamilton draft a message to Stevenson. When Stevenson
received it and was advised of the true nature of the planes, Hamilton
heard that Stevenson had called the White House to express his resent-
ment (p. 211).
2. D-2 photography showed that the initial air raid raid on on Cuba had
not been as successful as claimed, and a second strike was being prepared
when General Cabell entered the Headquarters War Room (p. 214). Cabell
stated that he thought only one air strike had ad been been authorised, authoris but the
Project Officers gave as their opinion that there had been no limitation
other than to knock out the Cuban air force. General Cabell sent for
Bissell and stated that the matter would have to be checked out with
Secretary Rusk. In the meantime, the second strike was held up (p. 215).
Cabell and Bissell went to meet Rusk at State. Adverse comments in the
War Room about General Cabell are quoted (p. 216).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
:
EYES ONLY
Chapter XIII (commencing at p. 218)
- 15 -
"1. The tenor of remarks in this chapter and in the conclusion of the
previous chapter is that the meeting with Rusk included the President,
Rostow, and Stevenson. (Other authoritative accounts have included only
Rusk, Cabell and Bissell; Tracy Barnes has said he also was present. It
is believed that the President was not at the meeting but was contacted by
Rusk on the telephone at his Virginia home. There is no other indication,
other than Hamilton's allegation, that Walt Rostow was present). (p. 219)
2. Hamilton's and other anti-Cabell views are expressed, with an
indication that the call-off of the second air strike would not have happened
had Dalles been in Washington (pp. 222-223).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
i
-16-
Chapter XIII (commencing at page 225. This chapter is apparently
misnumbered.)
1. This chapter describes some of the battle problems at the beach
:
head. Three Jets from the Boxer were allowed a reconnaissance run
over the beach (p. 227). Finally the President authorised an hour's air
cover from the Boxer, but the time was fouled up and the Brigade's B-26's
were shot down before the air cover arrived (p. 230).
SECRET
EYES ONLY
14-00000
EYES ONLY
- 17 -
Chapter XIV
1. In this chapter, Hamilton is highly critical of the post-l t-invasion
attacks on CIA by Administration officials and the press. Hamilton notes
the President's establishment of the Taylor Committee to look into the
causes of the failure and states his conclusion that the Committee was to
"whitewash the New Frontier 'by heaping guilt on CIA" (p. 239.
2. The only exception to these attacks was Charles Murphy's favor
able article in the September 1961 Fortune.. Hamilton believes the article
to have been authored I by by a a h high Administration official who had for me
Invasion and urged the President to commit air strikes,
Hamilton does not reveal bal the source's name (p. 238). [Presumably
Admiral Durke). Hamilton charges that one subsequent CIA Chief of
Cuban Operations was removed because of incompatibility
Kennedy (p. 242).
SECRET
EYES ANIV