14-00000
104-10071-10122
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
VIA
3P
TO
Chief, FORA
DISPATCH NO. (HEDA-186
FROM
Senior Representative, (New Delhi)
DATE 14 May 1955
GENERAL
SUBJECT
Operational/ INTEL
(PATLIPPER)
Transmittal of Reports
1. Transmitted herewith are copies of THERIAULT reports and notes
as listed below. Not included are carbon copies of the initial report
(plans undated) and the report covering the period 28 December - 14 January
as the third copy was not made.
2. THERIAULT requested that, if possible, a set of his report be
made available to him on his return to facilitate preparation of a master
report on overall findings and impressions.
Enclosures Under separate cover
(Pouched 7 May 1955)
14 Jan - 7 Mar
23 Jan - 18 Mar
25 Jan - 30 Mar
30 Jan - 12 Apr
8 Feb - 16 Mar
9 Feb - 18 Mar
17 Feb
Notebook
Interview with U.S. AMBASSADOR,
oz
Project (PA) FLIPPER
Retired from Project (E)
Distribution:
Ori & 4 -Files
9 May 55
2 -Files
SECRET
51-28A
8915
14-00000
SECRET
14 May 1955
02
Preliminary Debriefing
THERIAULT: 13 May 1955, 2030-2100.
1. Prior to my departure for New York to handle the preliminary
debriefing of THERIAULT, I discussed the following subjects with CNEA-5:
1) In view of the fact that THERIAULT's expenses on her recent
trip to India have been greater than was anticipated, 1,000
additional funds have or are to be shortly deposited to her bank.
This will be done by sterile check. It is to be accounted for
under the terms of the original contract.
2) CNEA-5 suggested that I take her reports up with me for
possible annotation and expansion. Upon examination on 14 May,
this appears unfeasible in view of the fact that there are CIA
control indicators and RI symbols attached directly to the reports.
3) CNEA-5 suggested that I pursue with THERIAULT the
possibility of developing an interest in Krishna Menon, utilizing
a cleared publisher who could request Menon to write a book. This
approach to be based on Menon's acute susceptability to flattery.
4) CNEA-5 suggested that THERIAULT be asked to review the
areas of her influence in order to lay the groundwork for an
official invitation to visit this country being extended to the
Prime Minister in the future. He suggested Sen. George and
Chester Bowles as possible points of departure.
5) THERIAULT is to be informed that her reports have been
of immeasurable assistance to the Ambassador and to the U.S.
Government vis-a-vis policy planning for India.
6) THERIAULT is to be asked to come to Washington for a day
or so in the very near future for further debriefing. This is
to be arranged at her convenience.
7) In view of the fact that THERIAULT has been unwitting
of the Agency's role in sponsoring her trip, I suggested that I
now make her witting in terms of the security involved. It
seemed advisable to me since it is likely that there will be
future contacts with THERIAULT. CNEA-5 agreed to this.
8) THERIAULT is to be advised that she is at liberty to
discuss any and all aspects of her trip with anybody with the
exception of the Agency's role in sponsoring it.
Removed from Project PAFLIPPER
CS Classification: NONE
SECRET JOB 66-668/59
Box: 5
Fold: #3
14-00000
SECRET
-2
2) In view of the vast amount of work that must be done,
I suggested that I plan to spend two days - 16 and 17 May -
if it becomes necessary. On previous trips to discuss
THERIAULT's mission with her, I found that she frequently
had other commitments which made it difficult to cover
adequately the material which I had amassed. If this is the
case on this trip, I should prefer not to press her. One
day's latitude seems the better part of wisdom. CNEA-5
agreed. We shall see, however.
3) In the event that it becomes necessary to reach me,
I suggest that my wife be asked to get in touch with me,
(Jackson 7-7018) and that I be asked simply to call my
office. I will then call on the sterile phone. For the
record, my telephone number in New York is CELHAM 8-2530.
SECRET
14-00000
General Comments.
HP duplicates
1. I have not talked with any Ford Foundation people and many
people. I am impressed by their quality. They are working
hard and are doing it in a self-effacing manner. I have not heard
one criticism of them from anybody. There are a few indeed, of course
I have not yet met them. They are here to help India carry out
her projects and her ideas, as one put it. And they seem to be
not only democratically but with a very real warmth and
sympathy yet they stay quietly in the background and take none
of the credit. But I feel more strongly each week I am here
that the work is solid and is having tremendously good effect in
relieving tension and hostility between the two countries. The
results of the actual work are apparent now and hope has recently
increased among Indians, also their self-confidence. When
confidence increases, sensitiveness decreases, of course.
2. From all I have picked up, the feeling is widespread that
Ambassador Allen did a good job out here. As one put it, he was
exactly right for the period he was here, just as Bowles
was right for the special maximum problems of his two years.
Both Indian and Americans highly raise both men.
3. We have a prize in Evelyn Hersey and somebody should thank God
every night that she is here. She and Drend are the most
beloved Americans in north India, certainly. Evelyn Hersey is
known throughout India. She was social welfare attaché at the
embassy beginning I think in 1943. The only one attached to any
embassy anywhere, I understand. Her work was to interpret the
social changes taking place in India, to become aware of the needs
and problems and how these needs and problems were being met, and
to offer her services and experience whenever or wherever it was
asked for. When the administration changed, she was dismissed by
Republicans on the grounds that this was a new idea, nobody else
had ever done such a thing, that is, no other foreign service and
so why should the U.S. do it. After urgent insistence, she was
sent back, this time under the aegis of TCM. She is, however,
doing the same job. Her influence is very wide; she is admired and
loved by literally thousands of Indians from the high echelons down
to the lower strata and their horizons. She is called on for advice
in various fields and by very high officials. She works behind the
scenes and feels that her work would be ruined were she given credit
for what she has actually done. She is vivid and full of life and
one would hardly call her self-effacing, and yet her work is done
almost anonymously. I have been around her enough to see how wide
her circle of Indian friends is; and how constantly and continuously
they stream through her house. She goes all over India. Has travelled
much more than 100 thousand miles. She says in recent months she has
felt absolutely no antagonism toward her as an American. She is
shrewd, has sharp eyes and care, knowledgeable politically is nobody's
fool, is strongly anti-communist, is warmhearted and intellectually
flexible. One of the best minds I have run into since coming out.
4. I wish we had five times the people in TCM. They carefully
avoid politics. I think it is wise. And they are young.
Removed from Project PAFLIPPER
CS Classification: NONE
JOB 66-668/59
Box: 5
Fold: #3
14-00000
General Comments. (continued.)
AH(NODES)1865
22
8. A very good project has recently been launched. It is
called The Delhi Training and Orientation Centre for
Foreign Technicians in India. This is the second time it
has been held, I think. It begins today, Jan. 24. Continues
for two weeks. (The first one worked out a fine short
bibliography on India, and a little brochure on "Foods
available in North India.) This second course covers
the Indian village, with visits out to villages, Indian
art, architecture, dance; Indian history, religion, Islam
in India, other religions and philosophies; Indian family
life and customs, health problems and resources, educational
problems, urban problems, rural unemployment and aid, the
role of foreign aid in India, discussion of the Five Year
Plan.
It is the kind of briefing that every foreigner coming to
India should have. It is open to all of them. We were
invited simply as guests and shall attend many of the meetings.
Films are shown; trips to art galleries and museums etc.
Miss Hersey has had much to do with this; also Dr. Douglas
Eshinger. And probably others, too. Indians will do most
of the briefing.
9. I shall write later about the Five Year Plan. Am still
studying it. Shall have a number of interviews with the
planners, or with a few of them. Shall also go out on several
of the projects. This seems important to me for social
changes and how they are made, broad politics. The political
picture certainly cannot be understood if the cultural and
social pictures are not studied and analyzed carefully.
We are enclosing a few excerpts of speeches made by
Mr. Nehru, Mr. Menon, and Mr. Chaubal this past week at the
Congress Party big gathering.
14-00000
Odds and Ends of Information.
AH(NODES)1865
22
1. My pilot told me that the Communists are organizing the
domestic workers of New Delhi. Last week there was a
meeting of ayahs at India Gate called together for this
purpose. The week before the bearers (or the sweepers)
were called together. The Communists are going about it in
a shrewd way, making very reasonable demands, such as a half
day off each week, a rise of perhaps 4 or 8 rupees a month
in wages. A Communist in every home will really be something.
He says there is little activity of Congress party or Socialist
party among these groups. The work is being done by
Communists. They, somehow, have the money to do this
organizational work while there is little money among regular
workers due to weakness of industry, small numbers and low wages
of the workers. He is troubled over lack of activity
among the desperate groups in labor circles. Says he has been
here only 3 months and cannot yet see the picture clearly.
2. The State Dept.'s coldness about permitting families to visit
the families in China gives the U.S. a very bad press out here.
It was very clever strategy on the part of China; it was bad
strategy on our part to appear callous to the feelings of
families. Family affection runs deep out here. It is another
one of our many small blunders which somehow loom so large
when viewed by the hundreds of millions out here. If, somehow,
everybody could count up to ten before speaking, and think of
how China is going to take it but how the entire area of Asia
will react. Those families could have been told quietly and
personally that if they wanted to go they would not be protested
by an American passport, they could even have been secretly
urged not to go, but the blatant press release... Forgive my
editorializing, I am sure I am not supposed to do it, but it is
very close here to the mind and heart of Asia and I cannot help
being aware of these reactions of the people. Anyone who loves
the U.S. cannot help but wish that our spokesmen would speak
more softly and more thoughtfully. A braggart or bully is disliked
by all human beings. To have strength is fine, to brandish that
strength offends.
3. The Times of India (Jan. 26) has excellent editorial on the new
socialistic society goal as outlined by Nehru and Congress Party
leaders. "Does Avadi mark a revolutionary shift in Congress policy?
All that it meant was an acknowledgment of the increasingly
important role of the public sector in the national economy - a
role that was already defined with greater precision in the
industrial policy resolution. There was nothing to indicate that
there would be any new encroachment on the sphere reserved to
private enterprise, and the fears expressed outside the Congress
on that score were, therefore, unjustified. Neither was there
any justification for the apprehension that the new objectives
meant a radical departure from the previous ideal... What
really mattered was not the label that was given to the policy
but the extent to which in actual practice it would help in
the production of greater wealth and in its equitable
distribution... What was significant... was that it should
Removed from Project PAFLIPPER
CS Classification: NONE
JOB 66-668/59
Box: 5
Fold: #3
14-00000
Odds and Ends of Information (cont.)
AH(NODES)1865
22
have been compelled at this stage to seek a more popular label
for its economic and social policies... If this commitment is to
be more than a design to steal the opponents' oratorical thunder, the
Congress Governments at the Centre and in the states have
immediately to set about the task of translating the new principles
into policies. The only way to make the policy of Congress
Governments accord with Congress principles is self-criticism and
yet there were responsible Congressmen at Avadi who saw danger even
in the condemnation of malpractices by Congressmen... The road to
full employment -- for which the Congress laid down a time-limit --
is by no means easy. It demands a complete renovation of life in the
countryside on the one hand and speedy industrialization making the
country as self-sufficient as possible on the other.
Digest of Nehru's speech on Jan. 24th.
He spoke of the unsuitability of totalitarianism in the democratic
Republic of India and the inadequacy of capitalism, stating that
there was left only a socialistic approach open to the country.
He stated that the acceptance of the socialistic society as a goal
meant the nationalization of institutions that could be immediately
nationalized with advantage. The presumption in so doing, said
Mr. Nehru, was that socialized production would be more
profitable. He, however, cautioned that if experience belied that
view, the step might have to be retraced.
He stated that a socialistic ideal which received the support
of the people could achieve the two objectives of increasing
national income and enhancing individual dividend.
He stated that India had established economic stability though
at a rather low level of prosperity during the first Plan period.
He said the credit for the achievement went not merely to economic
government and planning but also to other factors, including the
assistance from friendly nations. The United States, he said,
had contributed the largest share of foreign aid.
Removed from Project PAFLIPPER
CS Classification: NONE
JOB 66-668/59
Box: 5
Fold: #3
Miss Sandhur Hoden (private secretary of Mrs. Gandhi's
and reception claris at Prime Minister's House) over a cup
of tea in their quarters told the following story.
While in China, at first big banquet given them, Mr. Nehru and
his daughter (and others) were served tiny baby live mice
wrapped in honey. Mrs. Gandhi (his daughter) was so shocked
that she choked at the sight and turned away. None of them
could eat the delicacy. It was not ever served again to them
while they were in China.