14-00000
104-10167-10083
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
DIAZ
22 September 1959
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Conversations with REICHHARDT, 8, 9, 16, 17 September 1959
1. On 8 September Reichhardt phoned to report the following:
a. He took Marcos DIAZ Lans to the office of INS on Monday, 7 September to take care of his immigration
status. (Comments I was later called by Bill COTTER
of the Alien Branch, INS concerning this. CUTTER said
that when they reported this to INS - that service said
that AEFENS, the INS man in Miami has told them that
DIAZ bearing had already been held shortly after his
arrival. COTTER implied that Bernie was not reporting
accurately on the situation in Miami. I have not re-
peated this to bernie, because Alien branch seems to be
in something of a tissy in regard to the new people in
INS with whom they are dealing as a result of recent
transfers of personnel.)
b. Porate asked me to clarify what I wanted in the
affidavit of support for the wife of Marcos DIAZ.
I dictated a simple statement and told Bernie to have
it notarized and accompanied by a bank statement or
similar document indicating WILLIAMS' ability to support
her should it become necessary.
c. Bernie reported that Mrs. Catherine TAAPS, the international busybody claims that she is going to Cuba on
our instigation. She is accompanied by her entire
family. This information came from the Miami Chief
of Detectives to the OO Representative.
d. Bernie asked how he could identify himself to the three
evacuees in Miami we have instructed him to contact re
going to the Dominican Republic on our behalf. I told
him to use Dave Morales' name.
e. He asked me for information on our dispatch to Curacao
in connection with the PRCs for AC00 and the gift. I
told him I'd check and let him know. (Comment: The
same day I saw a dispatch from Havana answering the
questions, an info copy of which went to Bernie.)
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
1
SECRET
2.
2. I phoned Reichhardt on 9 September and we discussed the following
matters:
a. I told him about the visit of Angel Bus. He said he
had talked with BERS on this matter and that BERS
reported that Bus came to Miami on 1 September and
left on 3 September. BERS thinks he is a secret
police agent. Bernie is to see Bus for details on
this. (Comment: Reichhardt's report was received
on 11 September.)
b. Reichhardt asked me to check on his money situation
since no deposit has been made.
c. Reichhardt asked if I had seen copies of the new
letter being distributed by Emilio Portuondo
called Latin American Events. INEZ is listed as
editor and publisher and the firm is Latin American
Affairs Inc., 1023 Connecticut Avenue, Washington.
The first issue was published on 7 August. The 17
August issue includes a list of Communists. (Comment:
I am arranging for the CIA library to procure loan
copies of the publication for me to review.)
d. INEZ was in Miami last week. ORTEGA did not see him,
but according to ORTEGA's sources, INEZ strongly im-
plied that he has succeeded in obtaining US support
in the Departments of State and Defense including
commitments for training sites in the United States.
INEZ also said that he is in touch with Col. King.
This was covered in Uhaa-15.
3. On 15 September I talked with Reichhardt concerning the following
a. Ricardo LOEWE saw ROS. Bernie will see LOEWE about this.
b. Bernie will see FOX this week.
c. The addresses for the two evacuees who came by way of
El Salvador are not correct. I told Bernie to try to
find out where they are from the third, with whom he
is in contact.
d. Bernie asks that his local travel order be renewed.
(Comment: I checked this and the order has been
renewed through 31 December 1959.)
4. On 16 September the following matters were discussed with
Reichhardt:
SECRET
4IBR
-
SECRET
a. SANNIS: He called in the morning to ask for infor-
mation on this man. According to Reichhardt, LORIE
says that he was fired from the DGI for anti-Com-
munist activities and was expected to arrive in Miami
last night. LORIE is worried about him because of his
previous post as No. 2 man in the DGI. The Cuban card
confirms that he held the latter post.
b. De LORIE says that he knows RCS well, and likes him.
They met in Miami last week. RCS is in Miami again.
ROS is principally interested in getting Reynaldo
BLANCO out of Cuba. RCS says he was told the American
Embassy can have no part of this but suggested he (RCS)
ask De LORIE to see his Miami contact about assistance.
Bernie discouraged LORIE about helping BLANCO. Bernie
feels it is strange that Station Havana would tell ROS
about LORIE's Miami contact and that the former might
have mis-represented what was said. (Comment: We can-
not positively identify BLANCO - although such an indi-
vidual was listed by LORIE and the DIAZ Lanz as an Army
officer. It may have been one of the 1957 regular army
plotters.)
c. LORIE also asked help in converting Pesos to dollars.
Bernie did not give him an answer on this.
d. LORIE said he wants to establish contact with ROS.
The plan we have so far only envisages communication
from RCS in Havana to LORIE. While Bernie would pre-
fer to handle the matter personally, I think I con-
vinced him that this is unfeasible because of the
danger of provocation. He therefore suggested having
04 Cheesman brought into the picture, cautiously, as an
individual who would get in touch with LORIE when there
is something for him from ROS, and who will call LORIE
periodically to find out if LORIE wants to transmit
anything to ROS. This sounds OK to me. Bernie will
see CHEESMAN within the next few days on this.
e. LORIE told Bernie that Cuban opposition views BONSAL'S
trip to the US as a victory for the opposition - but
that if BONSAL returned to Cuba they will view the
return as a triumph for CASTRO.
f. According to an OO source Mrs. Katherine TAAFFE will be
returning to the US from Cuba in a few days. She told
at least one American in Cuba, Barry Rosenfeld, that she
is working for CIA.
SECRET
ZIBR
SECRET
g. In connection with my earlier query re the report from
Cuba that the Revolutionary Air Force is planning to
remove a couple of planes from the US to Cuba without
an export permit, Bernie got the following information
04 from BERS: A Cuban air force mission is in Miami con-
cerning the aircraft. The Cubans are happy with the
04 way BERS has handled things for them even though they
don't have the export license yet. BERS has been asked 04
to a party in Havana to be given by Juan Almeida in his
honor. He may go on Friday. Do we have requirements
for him?
5. On the morning of 17 August I phoned Bernie to tell him about the
followup on the report concerning the planes (Havana 2653). He said Reynolds 03
phoned him on the evening of 16 September about this. Bernie said he passed
the information to Customs, who said that since the Cuban air Force are the
owners of the planes (they are AT 6's) there is little that can be done if
they file flight plans for a local flight and then leave for Cuba. They
asked Bernie for suggestions and he said he had none. BERS reports that 04
the Cubans asked him if he could find American pilots for the planes
and he said he'd try, but actually has no intention of doing so. 03
WERS was impressed at the speed and accuracy of our information, but believes
that the Cuban Government is being precipitate in expecting to get the
planes out.
J. Flores/
WH/III/40
SECRET
7/BR