14-00000
104-10213-10002-
L
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DO/P11244
.....
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT
• Related Mission Directive for Mexico
1. Attached is the revised Releted Kission Directive for
Kexico.
2. Your approval is requested.
CONCUR:
4.
कान, 7/8
dh Division
Chier, CA
Ocaler, Cr
24 Jamary 1961
Distributions
Orig & 2-WHD
1-P9
1- CA
1 - ΟΙ
1- SR
1-FI/Plans
1 - PI/INT
1-RI
COPY
APPROVED:
Lichard Wil...
Deputy Director (Pians)
3 Ju
Date Approved
1.
1.
14-00000
RELATED FISSION DIRECTIVE POR MEXICO
1. ORNERAL PROVISIONS
A. National Policy. The long-range national policy objec-
tives of the U.S. Ocverment toward Kexico are to reduce
to an ineffectual level the influence of international
Costumiam, to encourage democratic government, and to
keep the Vexican government friendly and favorably in-
clined toward U. 3. policies. Further guidance is given
in the current CCB Regional Operations Plan for Latin
America.
B. Cperational Haphazis. The Station's primary emphasis
wlil continue to be placed on clandestine collection
operations and covert action operations against the
Sino-Soviet bloc, Cuban, and Ccamunist elements in Koxico.
:
C. Changes in the WAD. This basis policy instruction for
activities in Hexico has been revised in light of the
Station's last Annual Assessment of Progress Report and
to reflect core accurately operational conditicas, caра-
bliities and direction. In view of the importance and
threat presented by Communist Cuba to U. S. interests in
latin America, coverage of Cuban revolutionary activities
in Mexico has been made a specific requirement under
Priority A. Priority Bobjectives and tasks include
refinements of desired efforts and also provide for cover:
action cperations against Cuban targets in Maxico. The
furaer task for productica of action pitures and their
distribution has been deletei, as it is no ienger a valid
requirement; the former tasks pertaining to the possible
use of foreign diplomats have been combined, a task to
develop young potential political leadera (ZREAGER) has
teen added. Two previcus Priority Cobjectives have been
eliminated, as there is no established Kexican intelli-
gence service, and the Station regularly reports on
activities of the security services. Coverage of Chinese
Communists has been raised to Priority B coincident with
the elimination of the former Pricrity C section.
D. Contingency Reporting. In addition to the specifie
objectives set forth in Section II, the Station will from
time to time be called on to attempt to satisfy Intelligence
:
14-00000
3
!
Guides and Intelligence Directives, but it is expected
that these requirezenta be satisfied utilizing existing
assets. of particular interest cn & continuing basis
is information on: (a) any indications that Nexico may
be used as a base for clandestine activity directed
against the U. S. (CI Bock Messages 23 and 115); (b)
activities of non-bloc intelligence services, especially
those that are potentially harmful to U. 3. interests;
(c) the plotting of revolutionary groups according to
their current importance in attempts to overthrow the
regines of their respective Latin American countries;
(d) the surrent alignment and activities of political
forces with the potential for assuming control of the
Mexican Government; (e) U. S. Communists residing in
Mexico; and (f) the Spanish Communist group.
It will be noted that certain previous contingency
reporting requirements have been, amended as follows:
The former levy for reporting on the stability of the
Hexican Government has been changed to a more realistic
and meaningful statement as reflected by (d) above.
This modification is appropriate, as political changes
in Mexico are most likely to occur within the framework
of constitutionality. The previcus charge for reporting
on secret shipments of strategic materials fria Mexicc
to bloc countries is no longer specifically required and
has been doleted.
II. OBJECTIVES
PRIORITY A
1. Cbtain information on Sino-Soviet bice plans and activi-
ties in Mexico, including those of bloc intelligence
services.
a. Continue and, where possible, increase physical and
technical surveillance of bloc installations and
residences.
b. Through controlled agent assets, identify and monitor
the activities of bloc personnel, if conditions
warrant, attempt recruitment or defection of bloc
personnel.
2
14-00000
פיד.
c. Continue CI operations against bico inteligence
personnel.
2. Seek to reduce and, if possible, eliminate Communist
and leftist control or influence in key govertsoatal
and non-governmental organizations, political parties,
mass media outlets, and other elements that influence
public or official opinion and policies.
a. Develop political action penetration agents in key
functional groups, such as students, teachers and
organized labor, in order to alsrupt and reduce
their capacity for carrying out action har fui to
U. S. cbjectives and interests.
b. Expose and discredit illegal cr subversive Sino-
Soviet bloc activities and representatives in Mexico,
as wel as the activities atul paracinel of Inter-
national and Iccal Ccamunist front organizations.
c. Identify, discredit, and if possible eximinate
Cokarmista and pre-Communists from strategic positions
in goverment, educational institutions, state-
controlled industrial end agricultural enterprises,
laber unions, and student organizations.
d. Provide support and give guidance to individuals, and
organizations that can be induced to produce and dis-
seminate anti-Communist, pre-Free Horid propaganda
via redio, television, newspapers, or other media,
and carry out political action operations against
Communist or other anti-U. S. elements.
e. Identify, develop, and utilize important non-Communist
political, business or civic leaders to carry cut pro-
paganda, economic or political actions against Coran-
unist influence and induce them to support views
coinciding with U. S. Goverment policy intercats.
f. Continue to support and guide anti-Corrmunist youth
and student organizations, publications or agents,
and when necessary, develop additional assets in key
schools in Mexico City and selected provinces.
3
14-00000
8. Develop and support covert press assets in the
staffs of influential newspapers.
h. Develop access to individuals and organizations
in the labor field and support aen-Communist
leaders and groups in key unions.
3. Obtain information on the organizational structure,
key personnel, financing, covert plans and activities
of the Communist Party of Mexico (PCM), Communist frent
organizations and groups, especially the Partido Popular
Socialista (PPS), and non-Communist and/or anti-J. S.
groups that may be susceptible to exploitation by Inter-
national Communism.
a. Exploit and extend existing penetrations in the
PCA and the FPS.
b. Maintain pessirations of the PCM and seek to
ponetrate the anti-EXCINA wing of the PCit.
o. Dovelcp and, it conditions warrant, recruit a key
source in the workers' University capable of acnitor-
ing cultural contacts between the University and bloc
diplomatic installations.
d. Continue to monitor the activities of selected
Communist-influenced labor unions and frent groupe
through the penetration in the PPS) if conditions
warrant, make ssiected recruitments in the unions
or groups.
4. Continue to obtain information on Cuban Revolutionary
activities in Mexico and support U. S. Coverament efforts
against the CASTRO regine.
a. Continue to conduct penetration operations of Cuban
Embassy and induce defections of Cuban dipicmats.
b. Recruit agents in Mexico for operational use in
Cuba.
c. Escure support of high Nexican Government officials
for the conduct of operations against Cuba.
d. Continue to provide operational support for activities
:
14-00000
e.
directed against the CASTRO regine in Cuta,
Utilize propaganda media, political action assets,
and other covert means to combat the influence of
Cuban revolutionary ideologies in Mexico,
PRIORITY B
1. Combat ultra-nationalistic and anti-U. S. activities in
Rexico, and propagandize the dangers of Coramuniam.
a. Utilise existing media and political action assets
to combat anti-U. S. propaganda or activities.
b. Utilize existing media and political action assets to
prevent or negate collaboration between ultra-nationalisti
and Consunists.
c. Utilize media and political action assets to prevent
or negate the socio-economic and cultural penetration
plans or activities of the Sino-Soviet bloc.
d. Spot and develop for future covert collaturation young
local figures who show potential for political leader-
ship and who may be influenced to beccse generaliy
favorable to V. S. interests.
2. Obtain information on the secret intenticris and activities
of the Mexican Ocveriment in foreign affairs, particularıy
toward the U. S., the Sino-Soviet bloc, and Cuta.
a. Continue to develop and influence high level scntacts
in the Hexican Ocvernment, particularly the Office of
the President and the Foreign Ministry.
3. Collect information on the Sino-Soviet bloc.
a. Continue penetration of airline and steamship offices
and official government agencies to obtain advance
information on travellers.
b. Recruit or obtain the willing collaboration of selected
travellers to bloo ocuntries, especially those who will
remain in blos countries for an extended period and
sho may be on scientific missions.
5
14-00000
:
L
c. Recruit third naticaals and Latin American
diplomats to be assigned or traneferred to blee
countries.
d. Cbtain communications intelligence on blos diplo-
matio traffic.
4. Obtain information ca the Chinese Cocoaunists in Mexico.
a. Spot, assess and recruit or develop scurces in the
Chinese community.
b. Exploit the Gobernacion files on Chinese living in
Maxico and effect penetration of the SHACP.

