1000000
104-10324-10002
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Ralph E. Weber
SECRET
INTERVIEW WITH
SAM HALPERN
SECRET
23 October 1987
30 October 1987
13-00000
SECRET
Interview with Sam Halpern
23 and 30 October 1987
INTERVIEWER: As one looks into the background of the Congressional
investigations, what in your mind do you see as the most important factors for
bringing about the Congressional Investigations in 1975? It is an awfully
large area.
MR. HALPERN: I think if you look into the history of the background of why
the thing started it began long before the Seymour Hersh articles. The
Congress was planning to go into something like this anyway for a whole
variety of reasons. I think Morton Halperin and his group on the outside as
well as the ACLU and liberal Senators (particular Senators) were itching to
get at this for a long time. I am trying to think of the name of the (he is
now a Washington Post reporter) investigative reporter (I'm trying to think of
his name but I can't) who was in Government for a while, didn't like what he
saw largely as a result of the Vietnam War. Oh, Walter Pincus.
INTERVIEWER: Walter Pincus?
MR. HALPERN: Walter Pincus had quite a bit, I think, to do in the background
in organizing this whole effort. And not many people realize that the title
(it is a long winded title) of the Church Committee was actually a title that
was prepared by the staff people months before the Church committee was even
heard of or even Senator Church knew what was going on.
INTERVIEWER: Is that right?
MR. HALPERN: It will take me some time to look for it but remind me to look
for it. I put together some language on this many years ago in terms of the
inner-workings, what was going on behind the scenes among the staff people in
1
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the Senate to look into intelligence across the board. CIA was just one of
the targets, I guess one of the main targets, but not the only one. And it
was just a happy (from their point of view), a happy combination of
circumstances. Seymour Hersh was looking at different things and had access
to different sources and wrote those two stories in December of '74, which
just dovetailed beautifully with what they were trying to do and brought
together what they needed and what they wanted. And that is where the title
came from something the Church group came up with the title. It was the
staffers and the various other committees who had worked this out months
before. And by the summer and early fall of '74 these guys were ready to go
and when views from the Church Committee impetus came, there it was. They had
the title, they had the paperwork, they had everything done, and they just
pushed it through.
INTERVIEWER: Do you feel their efforts along these lines even pre-date the
Watergate investigation?
MR. HALPERN: Well I don't know if it pre-dates the Watergate or not. I can't
say. I just don't know. I think there were some possibilities of going in
tandem with the Watergate. But I don't think that the Watergate problem
itself was what these guys were interested in but I wish I could identify them
better. They were targeting against intelligence as such and they succeeded.
INTERVIEWER:
And some of it was disillusionment with the..
MR HALPERN:
There was another guy. The name was Paul and the reason I say that - the last
name was Paul because we; in the working of the intelligence officer, we had..
a hell of a time with two Congressional teams that used to go out for
Congressional committees
Disillusionment with the Vietnam War. No question about that.
--
these were staffers. One was made up of Pincus
2
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
who later became the Washington Post guy. Pincus and Paul (I am trying to
remember what the first name of Paul was) but we always regarded them Pincus
and Paul: P squared.
INTERVIEWER: That is P-A-U-L?
MR. HALPERN: P-A-U-L, yes. And they were problem children in terms of having
to advise the field; the State Department had a similar problem advising the
Embassies on how to handle these guys and how to brief them, what to brief
them. We weren't trying to hide anything, or kid them or lie to them or
anything like that, but it was a matter of how you really work with these
people to try to get them to understand what you are trying to do. These guys
were always traveling around Southeast Asia, in particular, and it was mostly
during the Vietnam War problem. And the second team (we called them L&Ms)
first the L stood for - Lowenstein was the L (and I'll be damned if I can
think of what the M was). But I think in looking into The New York Times in
1973 and 1974 long before the Watergate thing and the Church Committee
business began, these guys were always floating around as Congressional
staffers. I forget if they were the Senate or the House but anyway they had
these two teams which were real problems in terms of the Executive branch of
the government having to deal with the Congressional branch of the
government. The old conflict of foreign policy that lives in the
Constitution. I think the Constitution was made that way, to have the
stresses and strains that we still see today.
INTERVIEWER: Were these teams looking at the domestic?
MR. HALPERN: No, no. This was all foreign.
INTERVIEWER: Oh, all foreign.
MR. HALPERN: They were all looking at foreign at that point. They had
3
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
nothing with the Church nonsense and MHCHAOS. It was all in the foreign
affairs field. And they were mucking around all over the place trying to get
into stuff which we held as classified both we the State Department, the
Defense Department, what have you. Including the use of the Meo tribes in
Laos, it came out some money was involved, people were using Air America was
used, all that kind of stuff. These people were not representatives of the
then Intelligence Oversight Committees and with the advice of the then
Oversight Committees (the four of them we had) we had to be careful as to what
we told these people from different committees of the Congress. The four
oversight committees were jealous of their prerogatives you could imagine
particularly in the days when you had real strong men running the Congress and
they did not want all of these other committees, in terms of jurisdictional
fights, mucking around in what they were supposed to be handling it. And so
somehow we were caught in the middle of the jurisdictional fights in the
Congress at the same time we were handling classified stuff we didn't know how
far you can go with these people. They weren't cleared for a lot of stuff.
So they were real problem children. And these two teams were the precursors
to what later became the Church and Pike Committees.
INTERVIEWER: Well, were these teams attached to particular committees or
subcommittees?
MR. HALPERN: Yes, well they were representatives of particular committees. I
just can't remember what the committees' names were.
INTERVIEWER: OK, right.
MR. HALPERN: It didn't really matter to us. They were not part of the four
oversight committees.
INTERVIEWER: They were not?
4
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
MR. HALPERN: They were not.
INTERVIEWER: OK.
MR. HALPERN: And the oversight committees, maybe that was one of the
problems, didn't do much oversight as you well know. And as a matter of fact
I remember these reports from DCI's coming back saying, "I got nobody to talk
to up on the Hill. They won't listen. All they want to do is give me money
and personnel. And they say, you know, "Go do your job." And so this is
true. I have heard that from senior officers in the jobs I have held at staff
meetings over and over again. The Director came back again and he doesn't
have anybody to talk to. Nobody wants to listen. Nobody wants to know. And
there is. Senator Stennis and Saltonstall and all of those others.
INTERVIEWER: And Russell?
MR. HALPERN: And Russell who sat on the floor of the Senate. You know there
are certain things you have to just accept and not know about. Or Goldwater
even today, when he was chairman of the Senate Committee said, "This Committee
shouldn't exist." So the four oversight committees never gave us any trouble
really except toward the end, they were very clear about one thing. I think
it was Russell who told I think Dick Helms, DCI -- and you can check the
record on this one I'm sure
who told him, "this is the last year," (I
forget what year it was, I guess it must have been '71 or something like
that.) This is the last year we are going to fund those Meo tribes for you.
It's getting too big.
Turn it over to the military," you know, "and lose it
in the Defense budget." Because it got to over a hundred million dollars and
all that kind of stuff, I guess in those days that was a little big.
INTERVIEWER: Well did you have the impression besides Pincus that Paul and
L&M were also Vietnam veterans or. . .?
5
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
MR. HALPERN: I don't know if they were Vietnam veterans as such. I think
they did not like what was going on in Southeast Asia. And the so-called
Secret War wasn't a secret in Laos. It wasn't a secret war, for God's
sakes. How could it be secret if the press was writing about it?
INTERVIEW: Sure.
MR. HALPERN: It was the press that gave it the name Secret War. The Senators
and the Representatives, they knew what the hell they were appropriating. I
mean, at least the committee members did when they put down money into the
budget, and all the budgets and all that money was cleared by Congress. The
CIA doesn't print its own money for God's sakes. Somebody had to appropriate
the money, and it was there. And as a matter of fact it was (what the heck is
his name) Saltonstall, I think.
INTERVIEWER:
Symington?
MR. HALPERN: Symington. I'm sorry. Symington was the guy who later got Dick.
Helms in trouble in '73 in front of the Church Multinational Corporation
Subcommittee of the Foreign Affairs Committee and not his own committee. It
was Symington, Christ, he reviewed the troops out in Laos. Bob Jantzen who
was then Chief of Station, Bangkok, arranged for (I forget who the heck was
Chief in Laos and Vietnam), but anyway, he went up to the Meo tribes and
reviewed them and then he goes, "I never heard of things like this." What are
you going to do with them when they do when they do that? So, but that is
much later. I mean, earlier than the Church Committee itself, the one we all
know about. But this was all background in terms of, I think, it was the
Vietnam war basically that got people upset, the problem of the war.
INTERVIEWER: Did you also have the feeling that there was a different
6
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
attitude that threat of the Soviet Union wasn't as great. Not necessarily
seen that way in the Agency but outside the Agency?
MR. HALPERN: Oh. By that time people were looking at Vietnam. They weren't
looking at the Soviets. There is no question. I am talking '73, '74. There
was no question about that. The spirit of Detente may have something to do
with that. The spirit of Glassboro, do you remember Glassboro, NJ?
INTERVIEWER:
Sure, yes.
MR. HALPERN:
you. But I think that all, I think, was totally overshadowed by Vietnam. I
think that was one of the big problems, the Vietnam War.
Johnson, which began even before Henry and Nixon and what have
INTERVIEWER: And you saw this not only in the public but also in the Congress.
MR. HALPERN: Uh huh. No question. No question. I don't think Congress ever
really understood well, I know they never understood what Jim Angleton was
talking about on counterintelligence. Hell, for that matter very few people
in the Agency I think really understood that one. And I didn't have any
appreciation of it either until I got into the job as the Exec for the DDP.
Because unless you see an overall world picture it is hard to imagine this big
thing happening around you when you are worrying in one little area. But
anyway, I honestly think it was Vietnam that upset the apple cart. Watergate
just added to it.
INTERVIEWER: Just added to it.
MR. HALPERN: The frosting on the cake I suppose or the whip cream on the
banana split. Whatever you want to call it. But I think with Vietnam that
hurt most of all.
INTERVIEWER: So even if Watergate hadn't occurred, it was moving toward
investigation.
7
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
MR. HALPERN: It would have been. No question. No question. Because if I
remember it correctly, the P&P and L&M teams were concentrating on Southeast
Asia and looking into what the US Government as a whole was doing, not just
CIA, but they didn't like anything that was going on in that area and I think
that is what began gnawing away at the thing and broke it apart.
INTERVIEWER: OK.
MR. HALPERN: You know in terms of an operation these guys did a magnificent
job in terms of their objectives. They, in effect, were able to stop the
whole machinery of government and wreck the intelligence system in the entire
community, not just CIA. And it is going to take of couple of generations to
rebuild it. If we ever can.
You can't go home again. That is for sure. But
to rebuild what we had at one time is going to take at least a couple of
generations. Hell, it took us 25-30 years, that's a whole generation to get
the thing organized and then it came apart. It really came apart. And a lot
of this, because of the Vietnam, also had an effect not just inside the
government but it had the effect of the recruits you got. Even as early or
late, whichever way you want to look at it, from about 1970 on, we had been in
the war in Vietnam, for five years by then.
The recruits, the new people
coming in, who passed all the tests and what have you, and been through the
first training courses and what have you, and they were on their first
assignments from the desks or some of them even going overseas for instance.
The ones that I saw, and I made it my practice sitting in the DDP's office as
the Exec, to talk to as many young officers as I could. Always had an
excuse: a cable who was coming up for release by the DDP, or going up to the
DCI coming through the channels, I always was able to call the guy who wrote
the thing. I didn't care about the guy who coordinated, I was interested in
8
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
who wrote it. And to talk to them. If you have to stop let me know.
INTERVIEWER: No, we are fine, keep going.
MR HALPERN: Anyway, I used to talk to these fellows and women to see what
made them tick and it was a very difficult job listening to them many times
when they had all these bright ideas about intelligence, how you could do this
and how you could do that. And I had to bite my tongue and say, "Well, wait a
minute. You know, we tried that 25 years ago or 20 years ago and it didn't
work." And you couldn't just dampen their spirits by pouring cold water every
time they would come up with an idea, and yet somehow you had to try to get
them interested enough to look into the history of what happened and how you
did this and how you couldn't do this and how, why certain things would seem
beautiful when you dream them up and write them down on a piece of paper. In
the real world it just don't work. And we learned the hard way. All of us.
Trial and error. But you hope that the next group coming up didn't have to go
through that same torture if they would look at the record. And my concern
was that very few people were borrowing stuff out of the registry. Very few
people were interested in going back into the history of what took place and
certain activities. And you can't get it all out of a classroom.
INTERVIEWER: Right.
MR. HALPERN: And this was one of the things that bothered me while I was in
that job for those last few years is that: how do you pass on the experiences
so that people understand and learn without feeling that they are being pushed
down, without feeling that they are being squashed? Because you want
initiative. Half the business in dealing with human beings is initiative and
I don't know enough about the technical side but I know enough about the human
side. But you have to stop them. Why spin wheels? Why push a lot of paper
9
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
through if they're going to be disapproved anyway? And yet keep them
interested enough. And that's a tough job.
INTERVIEWER: And were these recruits, say, '70's
from those that you would have had in the '60's?
MR. HALPERN: Yes, the early '60's.
INTERVIEWER: The early '60's?
:
were they much different
MR. HALPERN: Before the Vietnam war. A lot of people were coming in, and I
blame the educational system for this, in terms of the teachers they had. And
I discovered this to my horror, as I mentioned earlier, about the Colorado
business the teachers there were worse than the students. Facts don't mean
anything to them. For example in Colorado it seemed to be, it was perfectly
all right for the students and the faculty to use the Church Committee
documents to prove one of their points about how bad CIA was or how bad DIA
was or what have you. But when I tried to use the same documents quoting
different pages, that was wrong. I wasn't allowed to do that. "That's just
junk. That doesn't mean anything." And I looked at them and I said, "I
thought I was at a university where you are supposed to be able to argue from
text." No, it was all right for them to do it but not all right for me to do
it.
INTERVIEWER: It fit in their pattern.
MR. HALPERN: Yea, and so, you know, what do you do?
INTERVIEWER: Were these recruits coming in in the early '70's and so on
MR. HALPERN: The early '70's.
INTERVIEWER: Are they more questioning, are they
.?
MR. HALPERN: No, that was one of the things that bothered me. One of the
things that struck me, both male and female, when they came in most of them,
10
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
when we got into discussions about operations or what have you, they seemed to
be more concerned about when they were going to become a division chief, a
station chief, and when they were going to become DDP and then eventually,
"how do I get to be DCI?" And finally after all of that is over, "What about
my pension rights?"
INTERVIEWER: That's already coming?
MR. HALPERN: Yea, in the very beginning in '71, 72, 73, and at least '70,
'71 and '72 when I was more concerned about talking to them because by '73 we
were having difficulties with the Schlesinger turnover and what have you. But
this was one of the things that struck me very strong, and I was bothered by
it, and these were the best of the applicants. They had already been through
all of the machinery and all the screening processes and what have you and
these were the shining stars from the academe, and I was concerned about
that. But again, what do you do?
INTERVIEWER: Were others troubled as well?
MR. HALPERN: Yea, some of my colleagues were. They picked it up the same way
I did except on a different level. They were doing it in the branches or in
the staffs, most in the branches, or in the area units and I was looking from
across the board. But it was the same idea. We used to kick this around at
lunch. How do you get instilled into the new group, the upcoming generation,
the guys who are going to take over from us, that there is more to this
business than worrying about your pension? I tried to tell some of them, look
some of us are going to be in this business their whole career and never see
the DCI's office let alone be the DCI. And so I said, "In all organizations
not everybody can be the field marshall. Some of them have to be privates and
stay as privates our whole career." And that didn't go down at all.
11
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
INTERVIEWER: It didn't go down?
MR. HALPERN: No way. No way. You know it was frightening then and I guess
it is even more frightening now. I don't know what the situation is now but
its a bad show. I don't know. Maybe we were brought up in a totally
different generation. I don't know different backgrounds. I don't know
whether it was things like the Depression or World War II or what, but we all
had a different
--
we all wanted to get promotions; sure, we all wanted more
money; sure, we all wanted honors and titles and God knows what else and
medals but.
INTERVIEWER: I wondered the same thing.
MR. HALPERN: You didn't sort of aim what the hell you were doing. "Hey, if I
do this right I'll get a medal." Or again, you may have thought maybe a
couple of these good things I do I'll get a promotion or something like that.
Yea, but that's normal. But you didn't do it for the purpose of the
promotion. And here these people are talking to me about: how do I get to
this and how do I get to that. I guess it's called career planning or
something. I have been through a lot of that, by the way, on career planning
from a personnel point of view, trying to chart out people's whole careers,
and I thought that was for the birds. How do you sit there and say in 25
years from now he is going to be in X, Y, and Z. Maybe you can do it.
INTERVIEWER: That will come in with Schlesinger?
MR. HALPERN: That came in with Bill Colby. Management by Objective and all
of that kind of nonsense.
INTERVIEWER: I've got some questions on that coming up.
MR. HALPERN: But I remember specifically, and you had better cut and paste
this tape I think, but I remember, for example, when Colby's Management by
12
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
Objective started coming out, one of the articles that was given to us,
written by a Britisher I believe, had a whole series of things
things not
to do if you are going to go into Management by Objective.
And we all looked
at this thing -- we, I mean, all of my colleagues
every single one of these
points, things not to do before you go into Management by Objective, we had
already done. So how can we go into this thing? We went into it anyway.
INTERVIEWER: Damn the torpedoes.
MR. HALPERN: Oh yea. It was great stuff.
INTERVIEWER: And was their a feeling again when you talk about these new,
these young officers coming on in the early '70's was there still a feeling
of family or is that a term that really.
.?
MR. HALPERN: Yes, that is a good old term. "Band of Brothers" is a better
term. We really felt, all of us did, we were a Band of Brothers. Oh, sure,
we had arguments and fights and all of that kind of stuff, competition on who
was going to get what job, who was gonna be chief of station or who was gonna
do this, but we still felt ourselves a band of brothers. I like that term
better than family. Maybe other people use family but we were different. We
were guys who had gone through the war and had started from scratch, building
an organization and building a concept which was mainly an intelligence
service. And particularly us in the Clandestine Service, long before we got
into this covert action nonsense but anyway we were interested in how you
collect intelligence using human sources and with technical support, but
anyway, we were building a service. We thought we were. An important one.
And even though it only produces a very small percentage of the total take of
the US Government, we thought it was an important take. It was never going to
match something like Ultra or this overhead reconnaissance. You couldn't
13
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
possibly. But we were zeroing in what we called the hard targets and the
intentions and plans more than anything else. And as that kind of a group we
were all, "We came up the hard way" kind of thing. And we felt closer
together as a result of that.
INTERVIEWER: And did the Band of Brothers include everyone in the Agency or
was it
--
?
MR. HALPERN: No, it was just the Clandestine Services.
INTERVIEWER:
Just the Clandestine Services.
MR. HALPERN: And as a matter of fact a lot of us in the Clandestine Services,
I wasn't one of them, a lot of us felt that we should not be part of CIA. We
should be separate. Totally separate and not be involved with anybody else.
And that was one of the fights that went on for a long time between the DDI
and the DDP in that most of the DDI people felt (and the top brass
particularly felt) that the DDP should be an adjunct of the DDI, responding
only to DDI requests for information and in effect be the DDI's library and
research staff. You know, find out if the bridge is still standing between
"x" and "y" in the middle of Uganda or something like that. And we felt
differently. The DDI felt that they were the national intelligence analyst
group and we felt that we were the national intelligence collector's group
human sources.
INTERVIEWER: Sure.
MR. HALPERN: And drew big arguments on that. Big fights. And DDI always
felt that we (DDP) should disseminate intelligence that we collect only to the
DDI. They would decide who else was going to get the information. We thought
that was a farce. We were everybody's collector from the President on down
and it was up to the President to tell us who else to give the information
14
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
to. And sometimes they did, like the Cuban missile crisis. And the President
stopped the distribution all across.
Completely.
INTERVIEWER: Was there any feeling - you talked about the Band of Brothers
in Clandestine Service was there any similar feeling in the DDI?
MR. HALPERN: I don't know. You'd have to ask somebody there that could tell
you. Because I am in effect the Johnny-come-lately to the DDP because I
started out in OSS and R&A, and then moved from R&A over into the SSU, the SI
side the Secret Intelligence side. And I know when I was in R&A our
feeling then was we were part of OSS, the whole thing, and even though the SI
people didn't always tell us what they were doing, we found out later that we
shouldn't know. At least I found out later. There was a good reason why we
shouldn't know. We could work with them and we worked very well with them in
terms of providing intelligence support for their operations in the field in
Southeast Asia, which was my beat, and we would sit and work with the officers
who were going out (not the agents) but the officers going out to do the job,
and when I was in Ceylon (again R&A) we worked very closely together with them
in terms of planned operations against various parts of Japanese held
territory. And we wrote all kinds of papers for them and pulled together all
kinds of stuff, and the question was in those days we felt more like we were
all part of OSS and OSS was a brand new thing. At least that is the attitude
I felt from talking to my friends about it, even as a part of R&A. But later
when it became a bigger outfit (a peacetime outfit) it was more well, we
were part of CIA in DDP but we felt for good and sufficient reasons that it
would be better if we could work out some decent cover so we'd be on the
outside totally devoid and divorced from the government. I don't know, the
number of times we had study groups planning on how to do this, to have a real
15
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
clandestine outfit working outside the government, with proper communications
obviously and clearances and what have you. We talked about Colorado before
in one of the papers -- go out to Colorado somewhere. You know, way out in
nowhere. This was in the '40's -- the late '40's -- or go to some other part
of the country and get hooked up by telephone or wire or what have you long
before all of this computer nonsense. Or even get buried in New York City,
Wall Street, or one of those huge monstrosities that existed even then as a
private company somewhere. And do actual company business -- be a real
business, but also run your operation. Well, this has been tried so many
times in terms of study groups and nothing has ever come of it. Nothing.
INTERVIEWER: Didn't even come close.
MR. HALPERN: No. You couldn't get people willing to provide you the money,
the material, work out all of the legal aspects and it was really a hell of a
job when you consider you have the salaries and social security and workman's
compensation and how do you work out decent pensions for people and making a
career out of it and all that kind of stuff. You could do it for a few (as we
have done over the past years). We used to do anyway. We'd have decent
proprietaries. We'd run our own insurance companies and all that kind of
stuff and provide lifetime pensions for people and work on a system that would
work. But you could do it for a few and we did. I don't know what they are
doing today, and I am not interested in knowing. But to do it for a mass, it
would be tough -- very, very, very tough. So when you talk about brothers or
family, as we got bigger the DDP-DDI split was very evident and, as a matter
of fact, at one time, believe it or not, in the very early days DDP case
officers on the desks were not even allowed to talk to DDI analysts because we
thought, in those days, we thought the DDI analyst would be able to convince
16
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the clandestine operator enough so that pretty soon the clandestine operator
was captive of the analyst and would be doing his research for him. And we
had plenty of calls from DDI analysts which in effect, the answers were in the
Library of Congress, for God's sake go get them. We are not going down there
and get them for you and we are not going to burden the field people with
going to get those kind of figures for you. They are right there. Go get
them. And we had lots of fights about that. Oh yea.
INTERVIEWER: I suppose there must have been a lot of tension?
MR. HALPERN: There was. There was. Because we kept saying the DDI analyst
was supposed to do their own research; do your own job. And I said in the
first place, and I remember I got into some arguments with some of them, and I
am sure my colleagues did too, that collecting intelligence via a clandestine
mechanism is the most expensive, time-consuming way of collecting a piece of
information. You have to have long lead time, you don't have a whole bunch of
agents in various departments of foreign governments so that you can just
press buttons and get answers out of them. And it takes time to identify what
you are looking for. And our job is a selected job and you have to go for the
hard targets. I am not interested in finding out the railway statistics for
you or the tonnage of wheat that goes through ports, for God's sakes. We can
get that from the Department of Agriculture or Commerce or something. This is
a very, very expensive way to do business. This is why we had to set up
actually a requirements staff which screened requirements so that we wouldn't
get flooded with this nonsensical stuff that should be done by somebody in the
US Government, don't get me wrong, but not the Clandestine Service. The
collector has got to be so fine-tuned that it is only after you've tried
everything else that you go for this particular thing. And don't expect the
17
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
answer tomorrow morning. So we had a whole mechanism just in the screening
process. As a result the orders went out, "Don't talk to each other." Well,
over a number of years we finally broke that down which I thought we should
have.
INTERVIEWER: When would you say what point of time was it pretty well broken
down?
MR. HALPERN: It began to be broken down let me give you two examples. One
in. 1957 and '58 when I was involved as the Exec then for Far East Division of
the DDP. We were involved in an operation in Indonesia with the Colonel from
Sumatra and later the Colonel from Celebes. I told my boss I was going to do
this and he said fine. I personally knew from the war -- from the OSS days --
the analyst in the DDI, and I think it was OCI, who was on the Indonesian
desk. And I kept her very well clued on important developments in the
operation as it was going along so that she wouldn't be caught short by things
and would be able to watch what went into the President's Daily Brief and went
into the daily stuff and I mean it worked fine. But that was on a one-to-one
basis. And how much she told the DDDI personally, that was up to her. I
wasn't going to tell her how to run the show. But it never was on a DDP-DDI
basis, you see, the two got together and said, "Here's the operation." No
way. The second time we were breaking it even more was after the Cuban
Missile Crisis. After the Cuban Missile Crisis. 1963 now we have moved
about five or six years.
INTERVIEWER: Right.
MR. HALPERN: Des Fitzgerald was transferred from Chief of the Far East
Division to take over