14-00000
104-10119-10367
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
20 February 1970
RETURN TO CIA
Bagkaround Use Only
produce
SUBJECT: VAN HET REVE, Karel - $839052
REFS;
Attached Clippings from the NEW YORK TIMES atd 11 Jan 1970 and
NEWSWEEK dtd 12 Jan 1970
1. References reported that Subject, founder of the Alexander Herzen
Foundation in Amsterdam, is publishing the writings of Soviet dissenters)
notably Andrei AMALRIK, Andrei SAKHAROV, Pavel LITVINOV and Anatoly T. MARCHENKO.
24
2. [Subject was granted a POA in June 1969 for use as an informant by
SB/PO/M, W. Europe, under Project AEEGGHEAD.
Atts. Refs.
Parengt
NEWS
:
Sarah K. Hall
SRS/OS
BR
14-00000
NEW YORK TEES
✓ 11 January 1970
-New Dutch Group Is Publishing
Writings of Soviet Dissenters
By HENRY RAYMONT
A group of West European, virt waters as
of the
scholars have set up a non-fed et
obsessive fear, thu hardc
profit organization, the Alex-
arder Herzen Foundation in that there is nothing in Soviet
sentative said. "They contend
Amsterdam
disseminate' law to prevent them from pub-
works by dissident Soviet lishing abroad and they insist
w.iters.
on exercising their rights."
The purpose is to protect the
author's name against piracy,
political exploitation, careless
Hanslations and other compli-
cations that have often marked)
the publication in the West of
manuscripts smuggled out of
the Soviet Union.
With the increasing interest
in Soviet dissent, scores of
Western publisters in recent,
months have turned to the
foundation for book rights to
such works as Andrei Amal)
riok's "Will the U.S.S.R. Sur-
vive Until 1984?", Anatoly T.
Marchenko's "My Testimony,"
and essays hy Pavei Litvinov,
grandeca of Maxim Litvinov,
Soviet Foreign Minister under
Stalin,
What differentiates the Her-
the émigré presses that publish,
zen Foundation from some ofi
manuscripts smuggled out of
the Soviet Union, he main-
tained, is that it has the ap-
proval of the authors to act
as their agent abroad.
Established in 1968
The foundation was estab-
lished in 1968 by Dr. Karel van
het krve became friendly with
literate at the University of
Leyden, with support from a
group of Dutch businessmen.
While he was Moscow cor-
respondent for a Dutch news-
paper in 1967 and 1968, Dr. van
het Reve became friendly with
several writers who asked to
books published in the West.
be helped in getting their
After he returned to Amster-
dam in 1968, Dr. van het Reve
Though the translations re-
ceived wide notice in the West-
ern press, little was known
about the foundation until one was joined by Dr. Jan Besemer.
of its representatives came here another Russian literature pro-
last week to explain its role fessor, who was also a news-
to United States publishers. paper correspondent in Mos-
"We received our inspiration cow, and Prier Reddaway, a
from the enlightened efforts of lecturer at the London School
Alexander Herzena to defy to- of Economics. One of the in-
talitarian methods against Rus- stitute's principal advisers is
sian authors by publisiring themi m Max Hayward, a translator of
in the West and sending their Russian literature.
books back through a literary
underground, the representa is to publish a manuscript in
The foundation's procédure
tive, who asked not to be iden- en Tits original Russian text, there-
tified, said in an interview. by insuring copyright, before
Herzen Had a Journal offering it to publishers in
Herzen, an aristocratic litera- Western Europe and the Unit-
teur and father of Russian ed States.
socialism, in 1857 started al Since it placed its first book
periodical, Koiokol (The Bell). in the West, Mr. Litvinov's
and those of other dissidents "Dear Comrade" (published
hanned by Tsarist autocracy. here by Pitman), the organiza-
The journal established a long tion has supervised transla-
tradition of Russian publishing tions and collected royalties
in exile that over the years has for the authors. It is now pre-
included such authors as Lenin, paring several test cases to de-
Gorky, Trotsky and Pasternal:. termine whether the authors
"The new generation of So- can be paid through official ac-
viet...
12 January 1970
Underground Press
By normal city-desk standards, Karel
het Reve wasn't much of a news-
d in his days as Moscow corr, spond-
for the Dutch daily Het Parool. "I
Pept forgetting to ask names and ages,"
be reals. But then, van het Reve was
My a scholar of Russian literature who
Lat only signed on with the newspaper
esa way of spending a year or so in the
Sot Union. And now, Lack at his lec-
nat Leylo University, the mild-man-
br-old ex-reporter is scoop-
se the work! by breaking the story of
weal birzal opposition movement in
for wlation nained
Akadir Herzen, the nineteenth-
hrough a
dur Russian writer who printed
Jared Russian manscripts abroad, van
fret bee has begun releasing a flood of
margoand poltical documents and
memoirs for publication in the West.
Acting only as agent and translator, van
bet Reve made headlines with the bitter,
apocalyptic pamphlet "Will the U.S.S.R.
Survive Until 195-4?" by youthful historian
Aosci Amalrik, which appeared in the
fall issue of the British quarterly Survey,
Ard best week, van het Reve gave NEWS-
Vear'r Bobert J. Korengold an exclusive
at his latest triumph over Soviet
porship: a 400-page dossier on the
closed-door trial of four Russian dissi-
der's-Yuri Galkanskov, Aleksandr Ginz-
burg. Aleksei Dobrovolsky and Vera
Lashkova-that took place in Moscne's
grim Kolom hovka Street courthouse in
carly 1968.
Van het Reve, as it happens, "cow-
cred that trial himself, shivering with
the rest of Moscow's foreign press corps
in sabzero cold on the street outside the
court. The charges were, in essence,
mplicity in the production of a "white
rk" of all gedly auti-Soviet documents
erming the 1966 trial of writers
Yoh Panel and Andrei Sinyavsky plus
alieged collusion with NTS, a counter-
4
10
revolutionary Russian émigré group in
Frankfurt, Germany. Friends of the ac-
cused smuggled out thumbnail accounts
of each day's procce lings, and when
the trial ended, van het Reve, through
his friendship with one of the self-
appointed court recorders, came into
possession of the 120 different manu-
scripts which make up the book that
Longmans Green will publish in Britain
Tater this year.
Time: Though much of the material is
technical, courageous voices like that of
Ginzburg bring the combative atinos-
phere of the tral to life. "I thought and
I continue to think now," he declared to
the judge, "that if I des agree with
something I should express my disagree-
ment openly... I know that you will con-
vict me because not one person charged
under Article 70 [anti-Soviet activity] has
ever beert acquitted. I will go off to the
camp calmly to serve my time."
Van het Reve naturally isn't eager to
reveal how he smuggled out this mass of
documentation. "Let's just say I man-
aged," he smiles. Probably through the
time-honored methods of the plain brown
envelope and the luggage of departing
foreigners, he and the Herzen Founda-
tion, which ironically occipies the former
headquarters of the Dutch Communist
Patty in Amsterdam, have "managed" to
receive not only the Amalrik pamphlet
and the Ginzburg trial records, bat a
steady flow of other anti-regime works
including a sharp attack on Soviet politics
by Andrei Sakharov, the noted nuclear
physicist, and a factual account of life
in the U.S.S.R.'s labor camps by Anatoly
Marchenko, who is still serving time for
"agitation."
A lapsed Stalinist turned democrat,
van het Reve insists that the Herzen.
Foundation is apolitical. "Our only aim is
to give these people a chance to publish
and that's all," he says. And if he can
keep his foundation clear of damaging
outside support and free of any profit
motive, at
wall hue gone
tate, then be
i
:
Vially beckrmend the reaption & t
San socint enti abroad.

