1000000
104-10332-10007
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
document kad 47pg Dif
so page
count
is wrongs
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
104-10332-10007
7 January 1994
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
Bryant Rogers
MEETING WITH LINDA FLORES
file
DO guide
name
Cuba
On 6 Jan we met with Linda Flores from the DO to discuss HRG concerns with regard to CIA's contacts in the 60's with well
known Cubans and Cuban Organizations.
The outcome of this discussion was that the DO agrees that we can release the names of those major players with whom CIA
worked with as long as we stay within the 60-63 time frame, with some overlap into 1964 for continuity, when needed. We then
discussed our relationships with major anti-Castro organizations. It was agreed that we could release the fact that as a funding vehicle
for the US Govt, CIA provided support including funding in general terms. In some cases we may find it necessary to reveal gross ballpark
figures for annual budgets. The DO would prefer that we continue to protect specific funding amounts where possible. They were
specifically concerned about releasing specific amounts paid to individuals or families of Bay of Pigs members where individuals could
claim that one was paid more than another. In supporting these organizations it was acknowledged by the DO that we could release
generic operational activities such as publishing journals or financing goodwill tours by prominent exile Cubans to Latin America The DO
reminded us that in reviewing these relationships with Cubans and organizations, it was important to protect CIA personnel, agents and
assets and any specifics on tradecraft.
When asked about Bay of Pigs training sites, Linda felt that the actual location should still be protected in spite of the fact that
they have been mentioned in open literature.
With regard to DO location numbers (19 for Cuba) she thought this was OK for the 60-63 time frame but would check with LA
Div. She had no problem with the release of the Bell location in cables since it was no longer used.
CC:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
Richard D. Kovar-Y- @ DA
John F. Pereira @ DA
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
8 November 1995
Jeremy Gunn,
ARRB Staff
Barry Harrelson,
CIS/CSI/HRG
Issues re Cryptonyms, Country
Designators, Action Indicators and
Employee True Names (U)
Attached is memorandum from the DO Focal Point for the
ARRB addressing the release of cryptonyms, country
designators, action indicators and employee true names. The
memorandum is intended to provide guidance to you and your
staff and complements information provided in previous
discussions. Ellie and I welcome the opportunity to discuss
these issues with your staff. (U)
Attachment
Unclassified When Separated
From Attachment.
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
JFK
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Historical Review Group
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
DO, Focal Point for ARRB
Position on Release of Cryptonyms, Country
Designators, Action Indicators and Employee True
Names
During the period since the ARRB last met, the DO has
considered the four issues listed below that have not yet been
addressed with the Board. These issues appear throughout the JFK
collection and by stating our position up front we hope to
facilitate the Board's review and to reach an agreement that will
be mutually satisfying to the Board and the Agency.
Cryptonyms - Except for cryptonyms related to
operational assets or activities involving Mexico or Miami,
the Agency will release the main component of cryptonyms and
withhold only the two-letter digraph. Treating cryptonyms
in this manner will protect the nationalities of individuals
and operations that are not pertinent to Oswald or the JFK
investigation and render an easier reading of the written
material.
Country File Designators We will delete the first
element of operational activity and operational interest
files in those instances when the credibility of the
narrative is not affected. The first element of the file
number corresponds to the alphabetical position of the
country name which is easily discernible, whereas the
subsequent two elements relate to type of activity or
interest and specific subject.
Action Indicator (Slug) Lines - Generally, we will
release the entire action indicator line of a document.
Occasionally, however, we will withhold portions when the
SECRET
CL BY 0695930
DECL OADR ::
DRV HUM 4-82
1
13-00000
SECRET
SUBJECT: Position on Cryptonyms, Country Designators, Action
Indicators and Employee True Names
context identifies a source or a relationship with a
specific liaison service.
True Names of Staff Employees In most instances we
will release names of employees who have retired in an overt
status and were serving in Headquarters when cited in a
document. We will continue to protect the true names of
employees cited as serving in a field position. References
to field personnel in true name are uncommon, however, since
pseudonyms are normally used in correspondence between
Headquarters and the field.
for Fredrickt. Wickham, Jr.
2
SECRET
13-00000
ASSASSINATION
REVIEW
BOARD
November 9, 1995
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 Fax: (202) 724-0457
HAND DELIVERED
Mr. John Pereira, Director
Historical Review Group
Center for the Study of Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D.C., 20505
Re: ARRB requests for evidence
Dear John:
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
I thought that it might be helpful to you if I were to provide you with our current
assessment of the status of our review of the Agency's assassination records and point
to where we would like to proceed in the future.
I would like to begin by acknowledging the efforts made by the Historical Review
Group to facilitate our review of records. It has been, as you know, a difficult and time-
consuming process both for the Agency and the Review Board. We very much
appreciate the personal cooperation of you and your staff.
We continue to be concerned by the slow progress that has been made. Although we
perceive that the task has been more difficult and time-consuming than Congress
anticipated, we have found that the careful education process in which we have been
involved has helped educate us with respect to your concerns and, we hope, has helped
demonstrate to you the Review Board's concerns.
We must, however, begin to pick up the pace. In many circumstances we are reviewing
and then re-reviewing the same documents over and over again. We are also
frequently put in the position of not being provided with evidence in a timely manner
so that we can make our presentations to the Board. While many of these difficulties
are understandable -- and perhaps even inherent to the start-up of the process in which
we are engaged we must expedite the process. Rather than dealing with dozens of
records at Board meetings, we need to move towards a schedule where hundreds of
records will be reviewed at Board meetings. From our perspective, it seems that it is
essential that the Agency be prepared to allocate significant additional resources to the
process of reviewing the records and making evidence available to the Board.
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: David G. Marwell
13-00000
Mr. John Pereira
November 9, 1995
Page 2
We also believe that the Agency still is not providing the type of evidence that will be
the most convincing to the Board. Where issues exist that the Board has not yet
addressed, and where the Agency would like to see postponements upheld, specific
information must be provided to support a postponement. General statements, while
useful in identifying the underlying issues involved, do not provide the Board with the
complete knowledge and understanding of the issue that is necessary to make an
informed judgment regarding release of the information.
The Board is looking forward to receiving the CIA's evidence in support of the
postponement of true names. As you know, we have planned for some time to devote
the December (12 and 13) meeting to this important issue.
Additionally, you will find enclosed with this letter the next in our series of information
requests, covering boxes 7-9 of the Oswald collection. We are submitting these requests
now in an attempt to give HRG as much advance notice as possible of which records we
will be reviewing for the January 4 meeting. Evidence for records to be reviewed
January 4 should be provided no later than December 13, 1995.
We hope that during HRG's review of the January documents, the standards outlined in
this letter will be kept in mind. If at any point an issue is deemed so sensitive that a
briefing is required, ARRB staff will meet with you at your convenience.
Thank you for your attention to this matter.
Sincerely yours,
Dand Mravell
David G. Marwell
Executive Director
Enclosures
13-00000
SECRET
11 December 1995
NOTE FOR THE FILE
SUBJECT: Briefing of JFK Board Staff: Cover
1. On 1 December, Barry Gibson, Deputy Chief of the
Office of Central Cover, briefed the Executive Director of
the Assassinations Records Review Board and other Board
staff members. Also participating from CIA were John Goins
and Eleanor Neiman of IMS; Linda Cipriani, OGC; and Barry
Harrelson and I from HRG.
2. The focus of the briefing was on the need to protect
the names of former Agency employees that appeared in the
JFK records. Gibson discussed the risks involved for people
who retired under cover if they were identified in the
public record as former CIA employees. He discussed the
efforts made by his office to obtain written statements from
the more than 100 individuals whose names appear.
3. The purpose of the briefing was to assist the Board
in its review of names when it meets on 12-13 December The
Agency was asked in particular to present, in writing,
evidence of risk for each of the names that will be
discussed at the Board's meeting.
しこん
John F. Pereira
SECRET
CL BY: 20185904
CL FEASON:
DECL ON:
Cov 2-87 15C
XI
DRV FROM:
AHB 70-9
13-00000
MEMORANDUM
March 20, 1996
To:
Review Board
Cc:
David Marwell
CIA Team
From:
T. Jeremy Gunn
Subject:
Board Guidelines on Release of CIA Officer Names
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
The Staff understands the Review Board to accept the following general guidelines on
the release of true names of CIA officers:
When the true name of a CIA officer (i.e. past or present employee of CIA) appears in a
document, the Board will bring to its review a presumption that the true name will be
released. In order to overcome this presumption of release, CIA must provide evidence
demonstrating that release of the name would be harmful. In order to meet its burden
of proving harm, CIA must tailor the evidence to satisfy one of the three categories
identified in Part I (below). However, when the name of an officer is of such
importance that the public interest would not be served in postponing a name, the
Board may release the true name consistent with the principles identified in Part II
(below).
Part I. Categories of Officers.
1. Living officers. For living (present or former) officers, CIA must prove that:
(a) the officer is living outside the United States (or reasonably is expected to
reside or travel outside the United States in the foreseeable future); (b) the officer
is either working or is retired under cover; and (c) the officer objects to the
release of his or her true name. If CIA satisfies this burden, the Board
presumptively (see Part II below) will release a pseudonym and postpone the
officer's true name until the year 2010.
2. Where current status of former officer is unknown. Where CIA has been
unable to contact the former officer because his or her location is unknown, CIA
must present a good faith showing that reasonable attempts have been made to
locate the officer. If the Board is convinced that CIA has made a good faith
showing that it was unable to locate the former officer, the Board will postpone
the true name until June 1, 1997. However, the Board may postpone the true
13-00000
-2-
name beyond June 1, 1997, if CIA provides to the Board, prior to May 1, 1997,
additional evidence that satisfies the criteria of either category 1 (above) or
category 3 (below).
3. Names having effect on current intelligence interests. If CIA believes that
the release of a true name may compromise currently existing intelligence
operations or might otherwise cause an identifiable harm, it must provide
evidence that: (a) the officer currently is engaged in clandestine activities; (b) the
release of the true name would compromise ongoing intelligence operations or
would compromise operations with current intelligence value; (c) the release of
the true name would reasonably be expected to cause significant harm to a living
person (including family members), or (d) the release of the true name would
cause a significant harm to the national security or the foreign relations of the
United States. If CIA satisfies this burden, the Board presumptively (see Part II
below) will release a pseudonym and postpone the true name until 2010 or until
such other date as CIA reasonably shows to be a date on which the release could
be made without causing harm.
Part II. Names of Officers Who Are Important to the Assassination Story.
The Board presumptively will postpone the release of names consistent with
categories 1-3 of Part I. However, for certain persons whose names appear in a
context that is important to the assassination story, the Board may nevertheless
vote to release the true name. In all such instances, the Board will notify CIA of
the importance of such a person and provide CIA with the opportunity to
provide additional information in support of postponing the release of the
names. These names shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, with due
consideration being given to the importance of the person to the assassination
story and such evidence of harm as CIA may provide.
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
From the Desk of Linda C. Cipriani
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Barry R. Gibson @ DO
Elaine S. Mathias @ DO
Linda C. Cipriani OGC
03/04/96 09:26:53 AM
JFK - Central Cover appeal
The General Counsel and I met with the JFK Review Board on Friday and discussed, among other things, how to deal with the potential
public release of the identities of former employees retired under cover. The Board clearly wants to do the right thing here, but they feel:
they are not getting enough information to make that decision.
Jeremy Gunn (JFK Board's General Counsel) will soon provided me with some of the Board's suggestions on how to deal with this which I
will pass on to you (including how to deal with Whitten). I would at the very least like to be able suggest that we attempt contact again
(either through CIA or the Board) with those retirees who have not yet responded to our letter. Of course, any suggestions you have at
this point will be extremely helpful. My sense is that this issue of protecting retirees is something everyone at CIA will want to appeal
just on the principal of it, but that we should do everything possible to avoid an appeal. [Until we work out an agreement with the Board,
you should continue to prepare that appeal you are drafting]
In the meantime, can you please provided me the following figures:
1. The # of people we sent letters to regarding the potential Board releases. (isn't it 150?) and the following breakdown if
available:,
- # living abroad
- # of those retired under cover vs. those whose cover has been rolled back or lifted
- # of those who still work for us in covert/overt capacity
2. The # of responses we received to date.
3. The # of responses to date requesting that we don't release.
4. The # of responses to date saying that they didn't care.
I realize you are all out of the office these days, but I would appreciate getting this as soon as you can. Thanks.
CC:
J. Barry Harrelson
Eleanor E. Neiman @ DO
Frederick Wickham @ DO
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
J. Barry Harrelson
John Pereira
Linda C. Cipriani
DCI/OGC/LD
JFK March 18 Board Meeting
8 March 1996
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
From the Desk of Linda C. Cipriani
NOTE FOR:
Paula A. Sweeney @ DCI
Robert O. Davis @ DC!
Robert D. Caudle @ DCI
FROM:
Linda. C. Cipriani
DATE:
03/08/96 02:50:39 PM
SUBJECT:
JFK - March 18 Board Meeting
I have been informed that Dave Edgers will be attending the next JFK Board meeting. If this is the case, it would seem that Jeff should
go as well.
Two issues need to be discussed with the Board: stations and cover employees.
1.
Jeff and the Board agreed in principal to a "window" in which all stations would be opened (1960-64). Of course, if
there are particular stations which need to be exempted from this the Board will consider it upon the presentation of substantive
evidence.
- HRG and the Board think this is a good idea that would enable them to avoid raising potential appeals every month
-Dave Edger needs to be signed onto this idea.
- Jeff, last month, presented additional information on Oslo, Stockholm, and Copenhagen. Jeff and Dave should be
prepared to answer questions or provide more information so that the Board will agree to protect these stations.
2.
The Board recently released the names of 16 cover employees. An appeal is being prepared (or so I am told). The
thirty days runs on March 18. We need to finalize with the Board how to handle this issue. At the last meeting the Board agreed that
this was a really important decision, but that they were not getting the information they need to make the right decision. At the last
meeting, the Board intimated that they might be willing to delay this release, if CIA and the Board could come to a mutually agreeable
way to deal with cover employees. I understood from Jeff that this is an issue that CIA will appeal on just the principal. If this is true,
the Board should understand what our ultimate position is on this, but that we are willing to cooperate with them to find a suitable
alternative (using pseudos or generic descriptions like "case officer")
3.
I will be out all next week but Barry Harellson/HRG (30292) and John Pereira/CSI) (30373) will be happy to fill you
in on the details. Barry will be contacting Bob Caudle next week to find out how the March 18 meeting will be handled.
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
29 July 1996
Chief Historical Review Group
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
DO, Focal Point for ARRB
Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
1. Cover mechanisms are an integral part of conducting
clandestine operations. We are concerned about individuals that
continue to be dependent on particular cover legends and on the
organizations that cooperatively work with us to provide those
cover legends. The following proposal is offered to streamline
the process of handling names and minimize the potential damage
an inappropriate release could cause.
A. Incomplete and Unidentifiable names:
a. We will release the occurrence of a name when a
common last name appears by itself or in conjunction
with a common first name such that it does not tend
to specifically identify the individual.
b. We will release the occurrence of a name if it
remains unidentified after a reasonable search is
conducted.
B. Identifiable names for employees that retired
overtly:
In most cases, overt employees' names will be released,
but in some cases overt employees may have a
portion of their employment remain under cover.
cases will require the same review as that of an
employee who remained under cover into retirement.
Such
ADMINISTRATIVE_INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
C. Identifiable names for employees that retired
covertly:
a. We will make a reasonable attempt to locate a
current address and contact the person. If the person
objects to the release of his or her name for reasons
associated with current life style issues, we will
object to the release of the name. If the person does
not have objections based upon personal circumstances we
will review the name for organizational issues(See
para C. c.)
b. If reasonable efforts fail to locate the
current address, but it can be determined that the
individual is still receiving a pension, insurance or
other benefit based upon cover legend, we will need to
continue to protect the name since source of income or
benefits can not be altered without prior notification
to the individual. If we fail to identify a pension or
other active benefit, we will review the name for
organizational issues. (See para C. c.)
c. We will make a reasonable attempt to review the
name to look for identifiable harm to the person's
safety, family, ongoing operational activities, national
security or foreign relations. Assuming that none of
the previous concerns are identified, we will review the
potential damage to the cover mechanism or cover
provider by the specific occurrence of the name if
released.
2. Because families of deceased employees could be the
beneficiary of pensions or insurance provided under the employees
cover legend, we must review them the same as we would the
employee. We also have second and third generation officers
following in the footsteps of their parents that could be
negatively impacted by the revelation.
3. Our efforts to locate current addresses will include all
internal record systems maintained by Office of Personnel
Security, Retirement Branch and Insurance Branch. We will
include a checklist reflecting completion of these searches
2
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
within the documentation when requesting continued protection of
the name.
4. We considered options of contacting IRS or OPM during
our attempts to locate current addressing information, but based
upon the fact that these offices would be unwitting of the cover
arrangement for the individual, it was determined to be an
unreasonable risk to the cover of these officers.
?
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
3
ADMINISTRATIVE INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
IMS/RPG Fwickham:mjk (29 July 1996)
Distribution:
Orig & 1- Addressee
1
C/OCC
1
IMS/ESG/ALB
1
IMS/ESG/IRB
1
IMS/ESG/HCS
1
IMS/ESG-OIT/MSG/RDP
1 ESG Chrono
λ
4
13-00000
Doc 6 drcidic
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
FROM: Gary M. Breneman, IC
SUBJECT:
11 February 1997
Comparison of ARRB and DO Memoranda re
Treatment of CIA Officer Names in JFK
Collection
1. This memorandum is in response to an assignment to
compare a 20 March 1996 ARRB memorandum written by T. Jeremy
Gunn and The Directorate of Operations response dated 20
July 1966, authored by Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr. Both deal
with the treatment of CIA officer true names which appear in
the JFK collection -- when they will be postponed and when
they will be released.
2. First the ARRB Memorandum Gunn describes in legal
terms the Board's position on the postponement or release of
CIA officers' true names. He makes a proffer which states
that there is a presumption in favor of release akin to a
legal evidentuary rule which causes a burden to shift to the
other party (CIA) to prove something. In this instance, it
is factual evidence/proof sufficient to shift the burden not
only back to neutral but to the other side of neutral which
permits postponement.
:
3.
The Gunn memorandum then sets out the criteria
required to meet the burden under several situations.
13-00000
A. For officers who are still alive he states that the
proofs required to postpone release of a name are three in
number and all three must be met:
i. The officer must be living outside of the U.S.
OR,
(R)easonably be expected to travel outside of
the U.S. in the foreseeable future;
AND,
ii. The officer is either working... (presumably
a current staff officer, contract employee,
or independent contractor)
or is retired
under cover;
AND,
iii. The officer objects to the release of his or
her true name.
COMMENT:
Mr. Gunn's criteria are a little confusing
and reach beyond the Board's authority. First, note again
that the three elements are joined by an AND
meaning all
elements must be met to satisfy a postponement. Second, the
first requirement of living or traveling outside of the U.S.
is not tied to cover. Many officers who do not work
under cover all of the time are, in fact, provided cover
for overseas TDY's. Thus, any officer who might
reasonably' be expected to travel outside of the U.S.
would warrant postponement of his true name. This would
13-00000
seem to include every CIA employee, contract employee and
independent contractor past and present.
With respect to the third element, Mr. Gunn and the
Board are simply in error. To my knowledge they have no
authority to require that an individual be consulted
concerning his or her wishes to maintain cover, thus having
his or her true name postponed, or to give up his cover,
thus having the name released. This decision does not lie
in the first instance with the individual but is an
institutional decision which lies solely within the purview
of the Agency and the executive branch of the government.
CIA as an executive agency charged with the creation,
maintenance, and dissolution of cover mechanisms is the only
entity competent to make such a decision. It alone knows if
release of an officer's true name will compromise an
existing cover mechanism which will, in turn, expose others
who share or have shared the same cover. It alone knows if
release of an officer's name will expose CIA sponsorship (a
cover entity) of a sensitive activity. It alone knows if
release of an officer's name will violate a promise of
confidentiality to a commercial cover sponsor which could
cause both embarrassment and possibly, financial hardship to
the sponsor and, in turn, substantially hinder the Agency's
ability to secure subsequent commercial cover sponsors.
Turning next to the wishes of a particular officer
(either current or retired) vis a vis staying with his or
her cover, these thoughts come to mind. For current
13-00000
employees, the decision is again not entirely theirs. If,
after careful review, the Agency does not have a strong
position on the employee maintaining the cover, the officer
should be permitted to decide. He or she should be
counseled however, that an action to remove cover could have
an adverse impact on future assignments or TDYs. With
respect to retirees, if, after careful review, the Agency
does not object to the removal from cover, the individual
should be permitted to decide. Note, that the responses to
this inquiry will be mixed. As a historical note, the
Agency over the years has been on an ever-swinging pendulum
with respect to cover into retirement,✗ ✗ cover for
life, etc. There will be officers who petitioned hard
unsuccessfully to have their cover removed when they retired
and will gladly consent to lifting the cover. There will be
those officers who do not want their cover lifted under any
circumstance.
By way of summary, it is CIA not the Board and not the
individual officer who makes the initial decision concerning
the maintenance or lifting of cover.
B. Former officers, status unknown. While the
heading to this section would seem to suggest the CIA does
not know the cover/non-cover status of some of its former
officers, the section does not rally deal with this issue.
Rather, within the section, Mr. Gunn simply recognizes the
fact the CIA may not be able to find all of its former
officers to ask if they want to be opened up or remain under
13-00000
cover. The test required by Mr. Gunn to satisfy the Board
and thus continue postponement until 1 June of this year is
a good faith showing that reasonable attempts were made
to locate the officer and failed.
The section contains the additional provision which
advises the Board may continue a postponement beyond 1 June
of this year (i.e., until 2010) if the CIA provides the
board with evidence which satisfies the criteria of either
category 1 or category 3. Such additional evidence must
be provided by 1 May 1977.
The requirements or tests of this section for the
Agency are not onerous but should be set-out as a series of
uniform actions or check-off's taken in the attempt to
locate each ✗ current status unknown officer. The record
of these actions could then be presented to the ARRB in
support of a request for continued to postponement. The DO
Memorandum mentions of the possibility of asking the IRS or
the OPM for assistance in this regard and this should
probably be done. I recall however, that the Service will
assist, through cleared contacts at the National Office, but
only to the extent of determining the whereabouts of the
individual and then contacting him and ask that he be in
touch with his former employer. I have no current knowledge
of cleared contacts at the OPM but they existed in the past
and I assume they continue.
c. Names having effect on current intelligence
interests. The Gunn letter appears to subscribe a higher
13-00000
level of concern to this section and its criteria than the
previous two, not recognizing the plain fact that the
criteria of all three sections are inextricable. It sets
out four separate criteria which, if CIA satisfies its
burden, i.e. provides sufficient evidence to prove any one
of them, will operate to postpone a true name until the year
2010. Note again, the criteria required are four separate
ones, each separated by a comma and between numbers 3 and 4
and "OR." They are:
i. The officer must be currently engaged in
clandestine activities; OR,
ii. The release of the officer's name would
compromise ongoing intelligence operations or operations
with current intelligence value (presumably, the latter
permits a review into the officer's past activities, agent
relationships, and cover positions); OR,
iii The release of the officer's true name would
reasonably be expected to cause significant harm to a living
person (including family members); (read broadly, this
provision would include, the individual, former agents,
anyone who shared the same cover or cover position, i.e. a
dedicated Department of State slot within an embassy); OR,
iv. The release of the officer's name would cause a
significant harm to the national security or the foreign
relations of the U.S. (a criteria which is broad enough to
drive the proverbial Mack truck through)
13-00000
4. In Part II, the Gunn memorandum takes back part of
what it gave in the previous section. It sets up a test of
importance to the assassination story vs. evidence of
harm. Essentially, it advises that the Board will weigh
the CIA's evidence but, if within its view, the true name
being considered for postponement is important to the
assassination story, the Board will release it. This means
for those few individuals who may be viewed as important
to the story, truly substantial evidence must be brought
to bear. Absent such evidence, the Board will release, and
the only recourse left to the Agency would be an appeal to
the President.
5. The Directorate of Operations Memorandum. The
basic concern with the steps for handling names as contained
within the memorandum is as follows. For officers who
retired under cover, the first step will be to contact them
and ask if they want their true name released. Per the
comments on page three supra, this should be the last step
of the review, not the first.
A. Other Comments. The resources and data bases
which will be researched for each name should be clearly
established and followed in a uniform manner. Deviation
from a set, orderly process will open CIA determinations to
criticism, objections and dismissal, i.e. release of a name
that should be postponed.
B. In addition to the data bases described
retirement records, annuity pay records, the office of
13-00000
security, insurance lists -- consideration might be given
to the Northwest Federal Credit Union, and overt data bases
such as Phonedec. Like the IRS and OPM, the credit union
might not be able from a legal standpoint to provide an
address. However, it would probably be prepared to contact
an individual and ask that he be in touch.
c. A comment must be made about the idea of
universally releasing the true names of overt employees. To
the extent that any current employee, even overt employee,
may be sent overseas on TDY under light cover, the release
of his or her true name via these JFK documents which will
receive widespread review could jeopardize his overseas
mission and possibly, place his life in danger.
6. These thoughts are intended to be talking points as
we commence to sort out the manner in which we will deal
with the true names. Clearly, we need to begin to quickly
identify those names which can be released, those on which
there is some question, and those few on which we really
need to dig in our heals.
6. I would be glad to discuss with you any of the
issues raised herein.
Gary M. Breneman
13-00000
SECRET - WORKING PAPER
5 March, 1997
Memorandum For: Chief/HRG
From:
Barry Harrelson
Subject:
Reference:
Name Issue / Status of Review
Meetings with ARRB staff (Marwell & Gunn)
4 March 1997
wak fao
Name Issue
I met with Gunn and Marwell (separate meetings) to
discuss the reopening of the names issue per my memo to you.
Both Gunn and Marwell reacted positively. They found the
proposal to be reasonable one and they are willing to work
with us in approaching the Board. However, both said they
could not predict the Boards reaction. Per Marwell, one
member of the Board (Anna Nelson) seems to believe that if a
person worked for the CIA it should be known.
Apparently our timing is excellent. Marwell is
planning to propose to the Board that they change the
process from the focus on individual postponements to
documents. Under the new approach his staff would have the
authority to negotiate with the Agency on the release of
documents, and only issues/documents of disagreement would
be placed before the Board. Marwell is convinced that even
with an additional year they will not finish the project
with the current approach. He sees our proposal on the
names as an example of how the process would work.
Marwell recommends that we include examples of
documents containing names of little or no connection to the
story. Bob Skwirot (he was