1000000
104-10335-10014
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
104-10555-70019
SINATION RECO
REVIEW
BOARD
1
January 28, 1997
Mr. John Pereira
Director
CIA MAS
DECLAC
RELEASL
IN THIS DOCU
Historical Review Group
Center for the Study of Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, DC 20505
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 Fax: (202) 724-0457
:
Re: Request for Additional Information and Records No. CIA-16
(Oswald Pre-Assassination Files)
Dear John:
Under the President John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992, 44
U.S.C. ยง 2107 (Supp. V 1994), the Review Board has the authority to "direct a
Government office to... investigate the facts surrounding, additional information [and]
records...." Section 7(J)(1)(C)(ii). Pursuant to this authority, the Review Board is
seeking to resolve in a complete and comprehensive manner certain questions related to
files on Lee Harvey Oswald that CIA may have held prior to the assassination of
President Kennedy. Accordingly, we request that CIA provide complete and
comprehensive answers to the questions identified below.
On May 12, 1992, Director Robert M. Gates testified to the Senate Committee on
Governmental Affairs regarding CIA's records on Oswald prior to the assassination.
Mr. Gates testified that "[p]rior to President Kennedy's assassination, CIA held only a
small file on Lee Harvey Oswald that consisted of 34 documents amounting to 124
pages....." (The Assassination Materials Disclosure Act of 1972: Hearing Before the
Committee on Governmental Affairs, 100th Cong., 2d Sess. 52 (1992) (emphasis added)
(copy enclosed). It is the Review Board's current understanding, however, that at the
time of the assassination, CIA held at least three separate files (including soft files) on
Lee Harvey Oswald: a 201 file (201-289248), an HTLINGUAL file, and an Office of
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: David G. Marwell
13-00000
Mr. John Pereira
January 28, 1997
Page 2
Security file.ยน We have identified references to one or more other possible Oswald files
including possible soft files designated as follows: CI/SI, CI/SIG, CI/LSN, and
CS/LSN.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Please identify, as specifically as possible, each file held by CIA on Oswald
at the time of the assassination of President Kennedy.
Other than for the 201-289248 file on Oswald, please explain when each
Oswald file was opened, the purpose for the opening of the file, and the
documents that were in the file at the time of the assassination.
For the 201-289248 file on Oswald, please identify which records (and the
total number that) were in the file at the time of the assassination.
To the extent that Counterintelligence and the Office of Security
maintained pre-assassination files on Oswald, please explain why those
offices maintained files on Oswald prior to the assassination. In
answering this question, please make appropriate references to the
Clandestine Services Handbook (CSHB) and to any other materials
(including organizational charts) that would help explain the
jurisdictional and organization reasons for which CI and OS would have
maintained such files.
For each question, please explain the basis for the answer and the sources (records or
persons) whom you consulted to answer the question. To the extent that you are not
able to answer a question completely, please so indicate and provide the best reasonable
answer. If, during the course of your research, you learn that any record relating to a
pre-assassination file or record has been destroyed, please provide us with all available
information related to the destruction of the records or files.
These queries should be interpreted in their broadest reasonable sense. To the extent
that you question whether certain responses may be within the scope of our request,
please let us know and we can advise you whether we would wish to include it. We
anticipate that the responses to these questions will be referenced in CIA's Final
Compliance Statement.
'One Office of Security file on Oswald (or relating to Oswald) may have been
numbered 351-164. In addition, Margaret Stevens may have held an Office of Security
"MS-" file on Oswald.
13-00000
Mr. John Pereira
January 28, 1997
Page 3
We request that you make this information available to us by February 24, 1997. If this
does not provide you with sufficient time, please let us know, in writing, by what date
you believe you will be able to answer the questions fully.
Thank you for your attention to this matter.
Sincerely,
lione
David G. Marwell
Executive Director
Enclosure
13-00000
S Hrg
THE ASSASSINATION MATERIALS DISCLOSURE ACT
OF 1992
...:
HEARING
BEFORE THE
COMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
UNITED STATES SENATE
ONE HUNDRED SECOND CONGRESS
SECOND SESSION
ON
S. J. RES. 282
TO PROVIDE FOR THE EXPEDITIOUS DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS
RELEVANT TO THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENTJOHN F. KENNED:
MAY 12. 12
57-233
Printed for the use of the Committee on Governmental Mar
1.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
WASHINGTON 1992
For sale by the U.S. Governmem Printing Orice
Superintendent of Documents, Congressional Sales Office, Washington DC 200
ISBN 0-16-039035-4
13-00000
50
denied, you say postponed. I am curious as to how long the post-
ponement will be. Will it be until the national security or privacy
are no longer threatened? Do we want to require a mandatory
review every two years?
Going along, some of the language is fairly broad. We had the
exchange here a few moments ago about an intelligence agent.
Then there is another section that gives us an exception-"an in-
telligence method which is currently utilized, or reasonably expect-
ed to be utilized."
The one that troubles me most, although I know there is a
reason for it, but I just am concerned about the doors it may open,
is "... an invasion of privacy of a living person, whether that
person is identified in the material or not." I am concerned about
that being used as a ground for requesting postponement of disclo-
sure.
So I think, consistent with all that you have said here, I hope
that you will give us the benefit of your second look at that Section
6.of this proposed Act.
*.
Chairman GLENN. Thank you.
Senator Cohen?
Senator COHEN. No further questions.
Chairman GLENN. Good. Thank you very much. We may have ad-
ditional questions. It has been a long session this morning here,
and we have additional questions from other members or questions
after we review. We would appreciate an early reply so it could be
included in the record. Thank you very much. We appreciate.
Mr. STOKES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator SPECTER. Thank you very much.
Chairman GLENN. The next panel is the Honorable Robert Gates,
Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, and the Honorable
William Sessions, Director of the FBI. Gentlemen, you have been
very patient here this morning. I know we had told you you would
be on by about 10:00 here. We are about an hour late on that, or a
little over. We appreciate your forbearance this morning. We look
forward to your testimony this morning..
Mr. Gates, if you would lead off, we would appreciate it very
much.
TESTIMONY OF THE HON. ROBERT M. GATES, DIRECTOR,
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Mr. GATES. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I am here
today at your request to provide my views on S. J. Res. 282, the
Assassination Materials Disclosure, Act of 1992, and to describe the
nature of the documents held by the Central Intelligence Agency
that relate to the assassination of John F. Kennedy.
Senator SASSER. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the Director could
pull the mike just a little bit closer? Thank you.
Mr. GATES. I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak on
this important matter.
Let me begin by stating that I am in complete agreement with
the purpose underlying the joint resolution, that efforts should be
made to declassify and make available to the public as quickly as
possible Government documents relating to the assassination of
51
President Kennedy. We hope that opening up and giving journal-
ists, historians and, most importantly, the public access to govern-
mental files will help to resolve questions that still linger over 28
years after the assassination. Further, I believe that maximum dis-
closure will discredit the theory that CIA had anything to do with
the murder of President Kennedy.
Even before the introduction of this joint resolution, I recognized
the need for greater public access to CIA documents of historical
importance. Two months ago, I announced the establishment of a
new unit within CIA that will be responsible for declassifying as
many historical documents as possible, consistent with the protec-
tion of intelligence sources and methods.
This new unit, the Historical Review Group, in the Agency's
Center for the Study of Intelligence, will review for declassification
documents 30 years old or older and national intelligence estimates
on the former Soviet Union that are 10 years old or older.
In addition to the systematic review of 30-year-old documents, I
have directed the history staff in the Center for the Study of Intel-
ligence to assemble CIA records focusing on particular events of
historical importance, including the assassination of President
Kennedy. The Historical Review Group will then examine the doc-
uments for the purpose of declassifying the records.
Because of high interest in the JFK papers, I am not waiting for
legislation or other agencies to start declassifying documents be-
longing to CIA. The Historical Review Group, at my direction, al-
ready has begun its review of the documents related to the assassi-
nation of President Kennedy, and I am happy to report that the
first group of these records, including all CIA documents on Lee
Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination, has been declassified
with quite minimal deletions and is being transferred to the Na-
tional Archives for release to the public.
This is, I acknowledge, a small fraction of what we hold, but it is
an earnest of my commitment immediately to begin review for de-
classification of this material. Indeed, as I speak, the reviewers are
going through a substantial number of documents and I anticipate
that many of these will be released shortly.
As we carry out our program to declassify Kennedy assassination
documents, our goal will be to release as many as possible. In fact,
I recently approved a new CIA declassification guideline for our
historical review program which specifically directs a presumption
in favor of declassification. I believe we can be very forward-lean-
ing in making these documents available to the public, and I have
instructed the Historical Review Group to take this attitude to
heart. In this spirit, the Agency today will make publicly available
these new guidelines for historical review and declassification.
To understand the magnitude of the effort involved in reviewing
these documents for declassification, it is important to place them
in some context. The CIA's collection of documents related to the
assassination of President Kennedy consists of approximately
250,000 to 300,000 pages of material. This includes 64 boxes of
copies and originals of information provided to the Warren Com-
mission and the House Select Committee on Assassinations, and 17
boxes of material on Lee Harvey Oswald accumulated after Presi-
dent Kennedy's assassination.
13-00000
52
Unfortunately, and for reasons that I do not know, what we are
dealing with is a mass of material that is not indexed, is uncatalo-
gued, and is highly disorganized, all of which makes the review
process more difficult. The material contains everything from the
most sensitive intelligence sources to the most mundane news clip-
pings.
These records include documents that CIA had in its files before
the assassination, a large number of records that CIA received
later as routine disseminations from other agencies, as well as the
reports, correspondence, and other papers that CIA prepared in the
course of the assassination investigations. I should emphasize that
these records were assembled into the present collection as a result
of specific inquiries received from the Warren Commission or the
House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Prior to President Kennedy's assassination, CIA held only a
small file on Lee Harvey Oswald that consisted of 34 documents
amounting to 124 pages, some of which originated with the FBI,
the State Department, the Navy, and newspaper clippings. Only 11
of these documents originated within CIA. I have brought along a
copy of Oswald's file as it existed before the assassination so that
you can see firsthand how slender it was at the time. As I have
already noted, we have declassified the CIA documents in this file
with quite minimal deletions and we are providing them to the Na-
tional Archives.
The records in this file dealt with Oswald's defection to the
Soviet Union in 1959 and his activities after his return in 1962. By
contrast, it was only after the assassination that CIA accumulated
the rest of the material on Oswald, some 33,000 pages, most of
which CIA received from other agencies after November 22, 1963.
The Committee has asked about documents in our possession
generated by other agencies. In fact, much of the material held by
CIA originated with other agencies or departments. For example,
in the 17 boxes of Oswald records, approximately 40 percent of the
documents originated with the FBI and about 20 percent originated
from the State Department or elsewhere.
Our staff is still going through the material compiled at the re-
quest of the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee
on Assassinations, which includes 63 boxes of paper records and
one box that contains 73 reels of microfilm. The microfilms, in
part, overlap material in other parts of the collection. We estimate
that within the 63 boxes of paper records, approximately 27 per-
cent originated with a variety of other U.S. Government agencies,
private organizations, and foreign and American press.
Although our documents do include many documents from other
agencies, we nonetheless have a substantial collection of CIA docu-
ments that will require considerable effort to review, and as I said
earlier, at my direction, this review for declassification is now un-
derway.
A preliminary survey of these files has provided us some indica-
tions of what they contain. Although the records cover a wide vari-
ety of topics, they principally focus on CIA activities concerning
Cuba and Castro, Oswald's defection to the Soviet Union, and Os-
wald's subsequent activities in Mexico City and New Orleans. They
also include a large number of name traces requested by the staff
53
of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, as well as mate-
rial relating to the Garrison investigation and Cuban exile activi-
ties.
The CIA cannot release a number of documents unilaterally be-
cause of the limits in the Privacy Act which protect the names of
American citizens against unauthorized disclosure, the sequestra-
tion of many documents by the House Select Committee on Assassi-
nations, and the fact that many of the documents belong to agen-
cies other than CIA.
However, we have already taken steps to lift the sequestration,
to coordinate with other agencies, and to begin the process of de-
classification. If necessary, in the absence of legislation, I will ask
the House of Representatives for a resolution permitting CIA to re-
lease the results of the declassification effort on the sequestered
documents.
While I expect a large amount of the material can be declassified
under our program, I assume that there will be information that
cannot be released to the public for a variety of reasons, including
privacy concerns or the exposure of intelligence sources and meth-
ods. Let me take a moment to give an example of this type of mate-
rial.
During the investigation by the House Select Committee on As-
sassinations, I understand that security and personnel files were
requested on a number of CIA employees. These files contain fit-
ness reports, or performance evaluations, medical evaluations, and
credit checks on individual CIA officers. Although irrelevant to the
question of who killed President Kennedy, these and other personal
documents ultimately ended up in the sequestered collection of doc-
uments. I do not believe that the benefit to the public of disclosure
of this information outweighs the clear privacy interest of the indi-
viduals in keeping the information confidential.
Similar privacy concerns exist with documents containing derog-
atory information on particular individuals where the information
is based on gossip and rumor. Our files also contain the names of
individuals who provided us intelligence information on a promise
of confidentiality. We would not disclose their names in breach of
such a promise. Where we cannot disclose such information to the
public, the Agency will make redactions and summarize the infor-
mation in order to ensure that the maximum amount of informa-
tion is released, while still protecting the identity of an agent or
the privacy of an individual.
If legislation is not passed by the Congress and signed by the
President regarding the JFK papers, to enhance public confidence
and to provide reassurance that CIA has not held back information
relevant to the assassination, I would appoint a panel of distin-
guished Americans from outside of Government, perhaps including
distinguished former jurists, to examine whatever documents we
have redacted or kept classified. They would then issue an unclassi-
fied public report on their findings.
The effort required to declassify the documents relating to the
assassination of President Kennedy will be daunting. However, it is
an important program and I am committed to making it work.
Even in a time of diminishing resources within the intelligence
community, I have allocated 15 full-time positions to expand the
54
history staff and to form the Historical Review Group that will
review the JFK documents and other documents of historical inter-
est.
I believe these actions attest to the seriousness of our intent to
getting these papers declassified and released, and to open what re-
mains classified to outside non-governmental review. It is against
this background that in response to the Committee's request, I cite
our few technical reservations about the mechanism established by
the joint resolution to achieve this same result. I intend to address
only intelligence community concerns. I will defer to the Depart-
ment of Justice on any additional problems posed by the joint reso-
lution.
First, vesting in an outside body the determination as to whether
CIA materials related to the assassination can be released to the
public is inconsistent with my own statutory responsibility for the
protection of intelligence sources and methods.
Second, I am concerned that the joint resolution contains no pro-
vision requiring security clearances or secure document handling
by the assassination materials review board or its staff.
Third, I am concerned that the joint resolution does not provide
the Agency with the opportunity to object to the release of CIA in-
formation contained in documents originated by Congress or the
Warren Commission. Under the joint resolution, documents origi-
nated by these entities can be released directly by the executive di-
rector of the assassination materials review board without any
review by the President or other Executive Branch agencies.
Fourth, the joint resolution provision for a 30-day period for
agencies or departments to appeal decisions by the executive direc-
tor to release information may not provide sufficient time for
meaningful review of what could prove to be a large volume of ma-
terial at one time.
Fifth, and finally, Section 6 of the joint resolution, which out-
lines the grounds for postponement of public release of a document,
makes no provision for postponing release of documents that may
contain Executive privilege or deliberative process, attorney-client,
or attorney work product information. While such privileges could
be waived in the public interest and, in fact, are not likely to arise
with respect to factual information directly related to the JFK as-
sassination, they would be unavailable under the joint resolution in
the rare case they might be needed.
These are the technical problems that I believe can be solved and
that will, in fact, expedite the release of documents bearing on the
assassination of President Kennedy. But, again, whatever the
future course of this legislation, CIA is proceeding even now to
review for declassification the relevant documents under its con-
trol. Further, we will cooperate fully with any mechanism estab-
lished by the Congress and the President to declassify all of this
material.
Mr. Chairman, let me close with a comment on why I am person-
ally committed to getting these documents out. Like all Americans
old enough to remember that terrible day in 1963, and as several
members of the Committee have alluded to, I also remember where
I was and what I was doing.
55
I was a college student at William and Mary, and I can remem-
ber how the word spread like wild fire between classes of that hor-
rible event. I made my way to Washington that weekend and stood
at the intersection of Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues,
where I waited for hours to watch the President's funeral cortege. I
will never forget it.
I entered public service less than three years later, heeding
President Kennedy's inaugural call, a call I think many in my gen-
eration heard. He said then, "Now, the trumpet summons us again,
not as a call to bear arms, though arms we need, not as a call to
battle, though in battle we are, but as a call to bear the burden of
a long twilight struggle, year in and year out, rejoicing in hope, pa-
tient in tribulation, a struggle against the common enemies of
man-tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself."
Mr. Chairman, the only thing more horrifying to me than the as-
sassination itself is the insidious, perverse notion that elements of
the American Government, that my own Agency, had some part in
it. I am determined personally to make public or to expose to disin-
terested eyes every relevant scrap of paper in CIA's possession, in
the hope of helping to dispel this corrosive suspicion. With or with-
out legislation, I intend to proceed. I believe I owe that to his
memory.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gates follows:]
PREPARED STATEMENT OF MR. GATES
Mr. Chairman, I am here today at your request to provide my views on S. J. Res.
282, "The Assassination Materials Disclosure Act of 1992," and to describe the
nature of documents held by the CIA that relate to the assassination of John F.
Kennedy. I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak on this important
matter.
Let me begin by stating that I am in complete agreement with the purpose under-
lying the joint resolution that efforts should be made to declassify and make avail-
able to the public as quickly as possible Government documents relating to the as-
sassination of John F. Kennedy. We hope that opening up and giving journalists,
historians and, most importantly, the public access to governmental files will help
to resolve questions that still linger over 28 years after the assassination. Further, I
believe that maximum disclosure will discredit the theory that CIA had anything to
do with the murder of John F. Kennedy.
Even before introduction of this joint resolution, I recognized the need for greater
public access to CIA documents of historical importance. Two months ago, I an-
nounced the establishment of a new unit within CIA that will be responsible for
declassifying as many historical documents as possible consistent with the protec-
tion of intelligence sources and methods. This new unit, the Historical Review
Group, in the Agency's Center for the Study of Intelligence, will review for declassi-
fication documents 30 years old or older, and national intelligence estimates on the
former Soviet Union that are 10 years old or older. In addition to the systematic
review of 30-year-old documents, I have directed the History Staff in the Center for
the Study of Intelligence to assemble CIA records focusing on particular events of
historical importance, including the assassination of President Kennedy. The Histor-
ical Review Group will then examine the documents for the purpose of declassifying
the records.
Because of high interest in the JFK papers, I am not waiting for legislation or
other agencies to start declassifying documents belonging to CIA. The Historical
Review Group, at my direction, already has begun its review of the documents relat-
ed to the assassination of John F. Kennedy, and I am glad to report that the first
group of these records, including all CIA documents on Lee Harvey Oswald prior to
the assassination, has been declassified with quite minimal deletions and is being
transferred to the National Archives for release to the public. This is, I acknowl-
edge, a small fraction of what we have, but it is an earnest of my commitment to
56
begin review for declassification immediately of this material. And, indeed, as I
speak, the reviewers are going through a substantial number of documents, and I
anticipate that many of these will be released shortly.
As we carry out our program to declassify Kennedy assassination documents, our
goal will be to release as many as possible. In fact, I recently approved a new CIA
declassification guideline for our Historical Review Program which specifically di-
rects a presumption in favor of declassification. I believe we can be very forward
leaning in making these documents available to the public, and I have instructed
the Historical Review Group to take this attitude to heart.
To understand the magnitude of the effort involved in reviewing these documents
for declassification, it is important to place them in some context. The CIA's collec-
tion of documents related to the assassination of President Kennedy consists of ap-
proximately 250,000-300,000 pages of material. This includes 64 boxes of copies and
originals of information provided to the Warren Commission and the House Select
Committee on Assassinations and 17 boxes of material on Lee Harvey Oswald accu-
mulated after President Kennedy's assassination. Unfortunately, and for reasons
that I do not know, what we are dealing with is a mass of material that is not in-
dexed, is uncatalogued, and is highly disorganized all of which makes the review
process more difficult. The material contains everything from the most sensitive in-
telligence sources to the most mundane news clippings.
These records include documents that CIA had in its files before the assassina-
tion, a large number of records that CIA received later as routine disseminations
from other agencies, as well as the reports, correspondence, and other papers that
CIA prepared in the course of the assassination investigations. I should emphasize
that these records were assembled into the present collection as a result of specific
inquiries received from the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee on
Assassinations. I have prepared a chart that illustrates this point.
As you can see, prior to President Kennedy's assassination, CIA held only a small
file on Lee Harvey Oswald that consisted of 33 documents (approximately 110
pages), some of which originated with the FBI, State Department, the Navy, and
newspaper clippings. Only 11 documents originated with the CIA. I have brought
along a copy of Oswald's file as it existed before the assassination so that you can
see first-hand how slender it was at the time. As I have already noted, we have de-
classified the CIA documents in this file with quite minimal deletions, and we are
providing them to the National Archives. The records in this file dealt with Os-
wald's defection to the Soviet Union in 1959 and his activities after his return in
1961. By contrast, it was only after the assassination that CIA accumulated the rest
of the material on Oswald-some 33,000 pages-most of which CIA received from
other agencies after November 22, 1963.
You have asked about documents in our possession generated by other agencies.
In fact, much of the material held by CIA originated with other agencies or depart-
ments. For example, in the 17 boxes of Oswald records, approximately 40 percent of
the documents originated with the FBI, and about 20 percent originated from the
State Department or elsewhere. Our staff is still going through the material com-
piled at the request of the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee on
Assassinations, which includes 63 boxes of paper records and one box that contains
72 reels of microfilm. The microfilms, in part, overlap material in other parts of the
collection. We estimate that within the 63 boxes of paper records, approximately 27
percent of the documents originated with a variety of other U.S. Government agen-
cies, private organizations, and foreign and American press.
Although our holdings do include many documents from other agencies, we none-
theless have a substantial collection of CIA documents that will require considerable
effort to review, and as I said earlier, at my direction, this review for declassifica-
tion is now underway. A preliminary survey of these files has provided us some in-
dications of what they contain. Although the records cover a wide variety of topics,
they principally focus on CIA activities concerning Cuba and Castro, Oswald's defec-
tion to the Soviet Union, and Oswald's subsequent activities in Mexico City and
New Orleans. They also include a large number of name traces requested by the
staff of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, as well as material relating
to the Garrison investigation and Cuban exile activities.
The CIA cannot release a number of documents unilaterally because of the limits
in the Privacy Act (which protects the names of American citizens against unau-
thorized disclosure), the sequestration of many documents by the House Select Com-
mittee on Assassinations, and the fact that many of the documents belong to agen-
cies other than CIA. However, we have already taken steps to lift the sequestration,
57
coordinate with other agencies and to begin the process of declassification. If neces-
sary, I will ask the House for a resolution permitting CIA to release the results of
the declassification effort on the sequestered documents.
While I expect a large amount of the material can be declassified under our pro-
gram, I assume that there still will be information that cannot be released to the
public for a variety of reasons, including privacy concerns or the exposure of intelli-
gence sources and methods. Let me take a moment to give examples of this type of
material. During the investigation by the House Select Committee on Assassina-
tions, I understand that security and personnel files were requested on a number of
Agency employees. These files contain fitness reports, (performance evaluations),
medical evaluations and credit checks on individual CIA officers. Although irrele-
vant to the question of who killed President Kennedy, these and other personal doc-
uments ultimately ended up in the sequestered collection of documents. I do not be-
lieve that the benefit to the public of disclosure of this information outweighs the
clear privacy interest of the individuals in keeping the information confidential.
Similar privacy concerns exist with documents containing derogatory information
on particular individuals where the information is based on gossip and rumor. Our
files also contain the names of individuals who provided us intelligence information
on a promise of confidentiality. We would not disclose their names in breach of such
a promise. Where we cannot disclose such information to the public, the Agency will
make redactions and summarize the information in order to ensure that the maxi-
mum amount of information is released while still protecting the identity of an
agent or the privacy of an individual.
If legislation is not passed by the Congress and signed by the President regarding
the JFK papers, to enhance public confidence and provide reassurance that CIA has
not held back any information relevant to the assassination, I will appoint a panel
of distinguished Americans from outside of Government to examine whatever docu-
ments we have redacted or kept classified. They would then issue an unclassified
public report on their findings.
The effort required to declassify the documents relating to the assassination of
President Kennedy will be daunting. However, it is an important program and I am
personally committed to making it work. Even in a time of diminishing resources
within the Intelligence Community, I have allocation of 15 full-time positions to
expand the History Staff and to form the Historical Review Group that will review
the JFK documents and other documents of historical interest.
I believe these actions attest to the seriousness of our intent to get these papers
declassified and released, and to open what remains classified to outside, non-gov-
ernmental review. It is against this background that, in response to this Commit-
tee's request, I cite our technical reservations about the mechanism established by
the joint resolution to achieve this same result. I intend to address only Intelligence
Community concerns; I will defer to the Department of Justice on any additional
problems posed by the joint resolution.
First, vesting in an outside body the determination as to whether CIA materials
related to the assassination can be released to the public is inconsistent with my
statutory responsibility to protect intelligence sources and methods.
Second, I am concerned that the joint resolution contains no provision requiring
security_clearances or secure document handling by the Assassination Materials
Review Board or its staff.
Third, I am concerned that the joint resolution does not provide the Agency with
the opportunity to object to the release of CIA information contained in documents
originated by Congress or the Warren Commission. Under the joint resolution, docu-
ments originated by these entities can be released directly by the Executive Director
of the Assassination Materials Review Board without any review by the President
or other Executive Branch agencies.
Fourth, the joint resolution provision for a 30-day period for agencies or depart-
ments to appeal decisions by the Executive Director to release information may not
provide sufficient time for meaningful review of what could prove to be a large
volume of material at one time.
Fifth, and finally, section 6 of the joint resolution, which outlines the grounds for
postponement of public release of a document, makes no provision for postponing
release of documents that may contain Executive privilege or deliberative process,
attorney-client, or attorney work product information. While such privileges could
be waived in the public interest and, in fact, are not likely to arise with respect to
factual information directly related to the JFK assassination, they would be un-
available under the joint resolution in the rare case they might be needed.
58
But, again, whatever the future course of this legislation, CIA is proceeding even
now to review for declassification the relevant documents under its control. Further,
we will cooperate fully with any mechanism established by the Congress and the
President to declassify all of this material.
Chairman GLENN. Thank you, Mr. Gates.
Mr. Sessions.
TESTIMONY OF THE HON. WILLIAM S. SESSIONS, DIRECTOR,
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION; ACCOMPANIED BY
DAVID G. LEITCH, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
Mr. SESSIONS. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, members of the
Committee. I have a complete statement which I will file, and
there are some diagrams which I will also make available for the
record, and a photograph of the files themselves.
Chairman GLENN. Without objection, your entire statement will
be included in the record..
Mr. SESSIONS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am pleased to appear
before you to testify about FBI investigative records relating to the
assassination of President John F. Kennedy. I applaud this process
and your efforts. It is fundamental that Government exist to meet
the needs of its citizens. An examination of these issues is directly
related to satisfying the intense interest and concern of our citizens
about the circumstances surrounding that tragic event some 29
years ago.
From the outset, I would like to state emphatically that I favor
maximum disclosure, consistent with the law and