14-00000
104-10227-10153
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
25 September 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT: Report on Cuban Operations
for period 1-15 September 61
This is the second summary report of activities in Cuban
operations, and covers the period 1-15 September 1961. This
report will consist of a breakdown of such operations into the
principal categories of activity.
A. CI Activity
1. Reporting to Headquarters. There was a total of twenty-
eight reports received during the period, and they
consisted of the following: Nine from res, fifteen
from debriefings conducted in the Miami area, two via the
open mail, and two reports via diplomatic courier. Additionally,
eleven CI reports were passed to the FBI, and
1,017 CI name checks were processed for 1643.
2. Agent Activities and Developments
a. There was a total of eighteen agents within Cuba at
the beginning of the reporting period and twenty-four
by the period's close.
b. Comment: Of the cover agents dispatched legally
during the period, one agent was a reverse. These
agents should provide increased coverage of anti-
Castro groups, activities at the airport and new
entrants into the diplomatic community.
c. Four agents were recruited and two agents were termi-
nated during the period.
d. In cooperation with the German desk, we have initiated
an operation to debrief Cuban sailors who pass through
14-00000
SECRET
the area. Clearances have been obtained for two
Cubans who will act as coordinators for the operation.
e. AVCELT-1, a Uruguayan diplomat, has been recruited
and has agreed to act as a courier for the intel net
in Cuba. The agent is currently on his way to Cuba
via boat.
f. AHOT-34, the principal agent operator, using signal
plan OGAKIK, returned to Cuba via legal means on
September and was once again in radio communication
with us as of 10 September. He is in contact with
ANWRBH-1, the principal agent of what remains of our
intelligence net in Cuba.
g. Control of the CGARIR H/T communication link was
passed to WAVE from Headquarters effective 14 Sep-
tember.
h. AMPALM-1 was dispatched to Geneva to attempt to
recruit Raul CENTRO Bonilla, Minister of the National
Bank of Cuba, who is presently attending the sugar
conference in Switzerland.
i. Jesus LOPEZ Cuerrara, Cuban airline pilot who is
disaffected with the Castro regime, is in contact
with the Madrid station and has agreed to cooperate
and remain in place.
j. Arrangements are being made for a technical surveil-
lance of the charge office in the Cuban Embassy,
Montevideo.
B. Propaganda Activity
1. Press Efforts
a. Operation Bolivar. Designed to place sixty student/
agents of the Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil
(DRE) exile group in universities throughout the
Western Hemisphere. Progress: Three in place and
twenty-one are processing.
SECRET
3.
h. Operation Virgen del Cobre. Designed to exploit the
8 September anniversary of the Cuban patron saint as
a day of mourning expressing opposition to Castro's
attacks upon the church, religious freedom, and Com-
munist freedom. Progress: All local and Western Hemi-
sphere outlets alerted for the 8 September campaign. Sixty-
five thousand pieces of propaganda were distributed
for walling throughout Latin America. The Cruzada
Fontalna Cubana (CFC)'s group sent eight cables
and 100 letters in the Latin American area. Through
the joint efforts of the CFC and Catholics, mass and
benediction services were held before 25,000 people
in the Miami stadium. It was said to be a huge success.
After the recent Castro executions, an amnesty campaign
was initiated on behalf of political and military
prisoners. Progress: One hundred and eight cables
and 220 letters were sent to Latin America by the Cuban
affiliate groups.
2. Broadcasting
a. The AVANCE newspaper sponsored twenty-four thirty-
minute programs over HIE, aimed against northern
Matanzas provinces on general anti-
Castro themes. Seven broadcasts run and one half hours
daily over short and medium wave.
b. We support a Cuban exile group producing a weekly
thirty-minute tape for distribution to a number of
Caribbean basin stations, and a weekly fifteen-minute
tape for distribution through WAVE channels to Central
and South American stations. At present some seventy
stations participate in this operation.
c. WAVE has assumed contact role with local offices of
Cuban radio broadcaster Luis CORTE Aguero through
cutout.
d. Beginning 11 September, Luis CORTE Aguero began short
wave broadcasts of thirty minutes daily on five fre-
quencies beamed to all Central and South America and
Caribbean basin.
SECRET
14-00000
4.
e. Maritime broadcasts were cancelled for period for
vessel maintenance. An electronic engineer has been
hired and construction of TV intrusion equipment has
begun. This equipment will be used on the maritime
broadcast and be targeted against the Havana area.
f. Cuban Freedom Committee funded and directed two
hours daily over WGBS, Miami, and six hours daily
over WQBA, Key West.
3. Leaflets/Pamphlets. Production and distribution through-
out the western Hemisphere by sources:
a. Cuban exile groups:
1) DRE - 10,000
2) CPC - 15,000
3) FORD - 20,000
b. WAVE printed 4,000 Grandes Mentiras (Big Lies) as first
of a series.
4. Periodicals
a. Avance, weekly newspaper: Two editions, 40,300 mg
circulation.
b. Informacion, newsletter, weekly: Two editions, 4,540
circulation.
c. DRE Trinchera: One edition, 2,500 mg circulation.
d. APJ Bulletin: Two editions, 16,000 mg circulation.
e. OEA Bulletin: One edition, 5,000 mg circulation.
f. FORD Bulletin: One edition, 5,000 mg circulation.
g. El Mundo, weekly newspaper: 3,000 per week in Domini-
can Republic.
SECRET
MEMORANDUM DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
SUBJECT: REPORT
CUBAN OPERATIONS
26 Sept 1961
1-15 Sept 61
h. Bohemia Libre, weekly magazine of over 170,000 mg
circulation.
5. Tours and Travel Cuban Group Representation
a. DRE. Two tours covering Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina,
and Chile.
b. CFC. Two tours covering Chile, Bolivia, Argentina,
Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Panama.
c. Ferique MESA. To Rio medical congress.
d. Arrangements are in process to send a small variety
troop to Mexico for propaganda visits. The performance
will be filmed on 16 mm for subsequent general
use throughout Latin America.
e. Arrangements were made with the State Department by
W/4/Security for the facilitation of re-entry into
the United States of long-term Cuban assets dispatched
on propaganda tours of Central and South America.
6. Other Activities. Headquarters representative met with
Rojas Santamaria, and discussed his plan for MAITOR
project, i.e., establishment of phantom cells inside
Cuba through means of propaganda chain letters. Head-
quarters is studying the idea with a view to possible
trial-run on a small scale.
C. Political Action Activity
1. CRC. A meeting was held 9 September with Dr. Miro Cardona
at which time he was advised by higher authority that our
Government regards the CRC as the control point of contact
in its dealing with the Cuban exile and underground
activity. A basic administrative budget will be allocated,
and it will be in the neighborhood of a million dollars
per year. All other allocations of money will be on the
basis of specific projects submitted by the Council and
approved by the United States. The Cuban Council will
continue to broaden its base allowing entry of all sub-
stantial exile groups not identified with Batista or with
SECRET
14-00000
-6-
Communists. Groups not willing to work with the Council
will be dealt with bilaterally (the United States and
the group involved), but Dr. Miro will be kept informed
of these activities. Such information will be kept in
the strictest secrecy by Dr. Miro and his specially
appointed assistant. If this arrangement should prove
insecure, all contacts will terminate. All problems
arising from Council activities will be discussed between
the CRC and the Bureau of ARA of State Department. Dr.
Miro will maintain his contact with the White House for
cases wherein he considers such contact to be urgently
necessary.
2. Additional Political Developments. After high level
United States consideration and decision, Dr. Miro was
informed, at a meeting on 16 September, that the respon-
sibility for the organization and plans for exile Cuban
jurists and lawyers would be his. In addition, to the
future funding ("salaries") of the existing ALABAU organi-
zation, $5,000 per month would be provided Dr. Miro or
his designee retroactive to 1 August to support Dr. Miro's
selection of lawyers to whom he has a long-standing
commitment. It was emphasized that this transfer of
responsibility must be accomplished harmoniously, without
adverse press reaction, or support of this work would be
withdrawn. Col. Wendell Johnson was hired and will be
placed in contact with Dr. Miro prior to 1 October. He
will function as the day-to-day contact between Dr. Miro
and this Agency and the United States Government. It was
made clear to Dr. Miro that his demand for responsibility
as exclusive channel to the other professional groups,
i.e., students and labor, was rejected. He was told that
any proposals he might wish to make in the student and
labor fields would be welcomed as promoting harmony and
eventual unity of Cuban exile anti-Castro elements.
D. Paramilitary Activity
1. Maritime Activity
a. Eight vessels, four Agency owned and four Cuban owned,
are available to support this activity. Of the eight
vessels, five were operational and three were undergoing
SECRET
14-00000
-7-
repairs during the period. The principal activity
during the period revolved around preparation and
support of operation YEABAC, to be implemented 16
September.
b. The LCI, BARBARA-J, is now awaiting additional
engineering and electrical work at the San Juan
Drydock Company. Delay has been caused by the lack
of priority and the induction of several Navy ships
requiring urgent repairs.
c. Captain TIRADO has spotted a complete crew for the
BARBARA-J and crew names and biographical data have
been submitted to Headquarters for clearance.
d. The Cover and Commercial staff is engaged in pro-
viding for the ships registration, name change, and
cover mechanism to allow for future funding and
operations.
2. Agent Activities and Developments
a. There was a total of forty-two CI assets involved in
activities during the period. Inside Cuba there were
two agents, a principal agent and a radio operator.
Externally, there were forty agent assets composed of
thirty-five CI types and five radio operators.
b. Approval was granted for the passage of 93-6 radio
gear complete with signal plan, pads and crystals
into Cuba via AMELESS-3 channels which utilize a
foreign diplomatic courier.
c. Approval was granted for the conduct of operation
STRIKE, an exfiltration operation to be implemented 21
September.
d. On 9 September seven WAVE agents were terminated
leaving a total of thirty in the group.
e. The internal CI/P operator ENRIQUE using signal plan
MUTLOX reports that his group has been operating a
clandestine radio broadcast since 12 September (Radio
SECRET
14-00000
-8-
Libertad) on 40 meter band from 1300 to 1315 local
time on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. We are
attempting to verify this data, and an announcement
will be made over Voice of America as to the existence
of the broadcasts.
E. Training
1. Agents trained by close of period 15 September
a. Total number of agents trained: 15
b. Total number of agents in training: 26
2. FI-CIA
a. Agents trained in 34: 2
b. Agents trained in tradecraft: 4
3. PA-PROP
a. Agents trained in exit/prop: 5
b. Agents in training in exit/prop: 9 (includes two
d/T radios).
c. Agents ready for training: 12
4. Paramilitary
a. Agents in training: 17
b. Type of training: Small boat handling, reception,
reconnaissance techniques.
F. Communications - Agent Type
1. Messages. WT: 15 total - 12 received, 3 sent by WAVE.
SECRET
14-00000
-9-
G. Support
1. Bases
a. WAVE. Nineteen staff agents were processed at
Headquarters and dispatched PCS to WAVE bringing
the total of PCS personnel to 23 at the close of
the period. The renovation of new offices at WAVE
is complete.
b. RTO. Now has responsibility for relaying all
traffic to and from WAVE and crypto relay responsi-
bility for all BAR traffic. The Office of Commu-
nications has received their approved T/O for RTO and
have commenced personnel actions on approximately
fifty personnel assigned at this installation.
c. The transfer of AEIG to the Office of Logistics
1) Mr. Glee Laney, WH/4/Logistics, is now at AFIO
for the purpose of adjusting the inventory
arrangements to be made to transfer all
CI material held by AFIO to Supply Division,
Office of Logistics.
2) The Planning staff, Office of Logistics, has
acted as coordinator in matters pertaining to
personnel, finance, cover and security, the
majority of which have been or will be settled
shortly.
3) Present plans contemplate the release of AEIG
to the Office of Logistics on 1 October 1961.
d. All material at AFIO has been inventoried and pre-
pared for shipment. Although the intended carrier,
the ship JOHAN, arrived at AFIO on 13 September,
loading was delayed due to the presence of foreign
shipping in the area. It is anticipated that loading
will commence on or about 18 September and will be
completed within four days.
SECRET
14-00000
-10-
e. JRA. A draft of a lease agreement for the JRA/RR
property has been prepared and forwarded to the owner
of the real estate for final approval.
2. Finance
a. Answers have been received from various sources re-
garding our queries for new Cuban pesos. Two sources
are in the process of procuring pesos in the amount of
$10,000 U.S. dollars.
b. The funding for JANSK is in process. Mr. Hall,
WH/4/Finance, is at WAVE to establish a commercial
set of records for maintenance by the field office.
c. Total FY 1962 obligations through 13 September for
Cuban operations are $4,675,933.00. Of this total,
$1,674,775.00 represents payments for the maintenance
of the CRC and payments for dependents of the strike
force through September.
There is a special intelligence annex to this report, "Counter-
revolutionary Activities in Cuba," for the period 1-15 September,
issued separately.
J. C. KING
Chief,
Western Hemisphere Division
DDP/WH/4/Plans: W. R. Dinsmore,bh (27 September 1961)
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Addressee
1 - C/OPC
1 - A/DDP/A
1 - C/D
1 - WH/COP3
1 - C/MN/A
2 - WH/4/Plans
SECRET