14-00000
104-10171-10229
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Chief of Station, Mexico
Chief, W
Letters for discussion with Anthony R. PECHAY
on Role of ANCIGAR to Mexico
Rome
X
PRIORITY
10--11
For PECHAY
The following is in response to your request for summary of points that need
to be clarified in discussions between you and Station Chiefs on the forthcoming
ARRIVAL OF ANCIGAR to Mexico City.
24,01
1. Political
A. The requirement that the "overt office will consist of only career
officials, the others being "covert", and the statement that the presence
of Long 1049 in Mexico should not become known and never admitted".
(Cmts: Mix-59, 24 July. (Comments: It will appear impossible to comply
with this requirement if there is to be an overt office and any publicity
in Mexico or elsewhere, since the identities and whereabouts of
all ANCIGAR members will be a matter of public knowledge.)
B. The statement in para 3, JECI-54 that the Mexican Government
will not be friendly unless Nivar activities and "plotting to overthrow
the Cuban Government remain covert. (Comments: Since there is to be an overt
office and propaganda department and ANCIGAR has been, and will have to
continue to be, described as a group organized for the purpose of overthrowing
the Cuban Government, their necessary propaganda activities toward
Mexico cannot be covert. Could it be modified to apply only to agreement that
no military invasion would be launched from Mexico?)
C. Clarification of the words "favor established" in the following
statement by LICK: "...we may have to disavow our part in the effort
if it be established back in contact with cast in Mexico. (Comments: Since
there will be overt aspects to the effort, the term "disavow" is ambiguous.
What will constitute its being established that is in contact with
ANCIGAR? Certainly we can expect the charge will be made many times by the
Soviets and Cubans.)
D. Possibility of showing writing to Mexican Government on
Cuban subversive activities (para 5, KAI-553) before arrival
which would undoubtedly be of assistance in obtaining popular attitude
sympathy for activities.
2. Propaganda
We plan to have an ANCIGAR department in Mexico, but it will be
impossible for them to operate effectively, or indeed at all, if
it continues to insist on ANCIGAR activities in Mexico "remaining covert"
because public or press release. We feel a tremendous publicity drive should
be made simultaneously with ANCIGAR arrival in Mexico. Extensive
public relations work will be needed to a large extent to improve the
political and public climate to enable people to work effectively
in Mexico. Also, it is hoped that Station will send someone to
arrive in Mexico soon to produce suitable material. These materials will
ostensibly be independent but actually will be polls also be journalistic,
some news releases for broadcasting over radio.
GIN
2/4
4-00000
Bo-885
3. PM
Requirements set forth DIR-40133, dated 15 July. If permission could
be obtained for use this territory, even if only for 72 hours prior and
during the coin strike operation, the project would be advanced materially.
A. We concur requirement that WICKER contact with Station and with
ANCIGAR be clandestine. Need Station's assistance in working out mechanics
of these contacts.
248. Station's service and assistance needed on following: (1) provision
of first lateral telephone tape/nite installation operational data for ANCIGAR
consumption) (2) protection (unilateral sub rosa) of ANCIGAR members
against enemy agent executive actions) (3) lateral agent surveillance
to check out security and loyalty of overt/covert ANCIGAR members) (4) selection
of secure safe sites for housing of Niti members, for overt office, and
for covert meeting sites.
C. Mexican Government capabilities in terms of protection of overt
ANCIGAR members against enemy agent executive action operations.
D. Can Station communication facilities (pouch and cable) be used for
secure ANCIGAR communications between members in Mexico and those in PARIS
and elsewhere?
OLIVER G. GALLOWAY
Distributions
3 - Mexico
9 August 1960
1 - Mexico Desk
1 - WH/A/Chrono
2/4