14-00000
104-10226-10023
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
US RECORD MATERIAL
DUC DATE
:
:
1
THIS DOCUMENTS CHARGED TO YOU.
2. KEREN THUS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES &
DESPOTION SECTION, RME ON OR BEFORE
::
DATI INDICATED.
IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
K
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
4
1790
DAFIVECITIONS.
5.
2024
12
5. Corlat
OG/PER
6.
7
8
10.
11.
12.
13.
1471
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
78-112.9
432 373
FILE NON CIAAD 37
DOCUMENT:
14
RETURN TO
GA-50
15
F/ARID
موسين
FORM
610
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
BCORDS CENTER
1
AFFASE
ten
3X
a
PL DIA
FOLDER:
PAGE:
I
BOX:
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
folder #
NCFE
December 10tani
14-00000
13.00
1
1.1
25
COACTAion at the Department of
en 21arch 1752.
10. Joyc., frutando er f
CaConer, Lloyd and prawn from he
Mr. Free Sat roturned fra
What he had recovcats to make about
a. follo
2700 and sald
arter Umy wore
1. Het in the Crock tacer.
complained of ve activitiosteriners et lue30
triar, تونatetime
and otheгo
wint to class ciner countries pつもしまた
ulunut clear.60
0.
moke stro, Lat its ad told
tings that t
reporters
1a.
world revitat une views
mrr dentical
male... arm
List of
..
an! and
al how i
We cu Lones anx!
winter, laner
:veral
call tont de
and of V.A
- Landow.k.t
ciiic
h refurees
we ciscussion
8... 8 colved for
.
2. しない
Carver
around rape
Cources
ts and rasri
זריוט אן
ikaner
i.at
or Let Le
A massor security.
ייזר
C
wever, inetricAC
ain to barm,
1.
3.
irene
מתתי גן ריטר •
ab
Fuldance, si at ba
voud te
mer o
٢٠٦٠
,
outlinc
r.
ר מוייררכי
unic. o cra
It is infitrat
1 ألم. arry.
orrie.
.a..
Licy
dwrt.or
d. ....
14-00000
:
-2-
mplied that in fact it did receive constant and frequent (olicy
guidance but int Umbers of Lio to staff of het were looking
for the time of policy dance we did fot odata kimi of
overall lobal strategy coverin, scalfic incliente avi eventual
tine, a kind of polla aldance vien rolally neler omr
ould be written. "pecifically no had oljection to showing to
top 100, 101 policy line.
Finally, r. Kohler questioned the alvisatility of cutting πιο
now Russian Urnittee wider the crusade. He pointed out is fear
that, wat wito hr and AFA airea weder the Crusade, Compres
would won believe there was colling left for VGA to cover. 1.5. Joyce
rose to Lala question oxplaining the necessity of clping Adairal Kirk
to find some cover. ile pointed out that focars. hraven and Devino
had been detailed to acsure that Crusado oblicity did not give the
imprescion that HPE and hand any new rivate" radio would obviato
the necessity for the Volou, and assured ka lor tat sil Crusade
publicity, posters etc. would avold als 100..11ity. -isner non-
tioned nio desire to lind inter cover for we now Cormities ani
Where was ome talk of touriations. No tettor cover ad, owver,
been found at the manent and it was a parent What Acairal kirk must
have some answer to questions watch are autat tied 6. r. koder
anmored this argument by reiterating his fears.
C:TB/ch
Orig mma (thru Ais C)
1 cc - DD/
Lce F (Mr. Poor)
1 cc Y
1 cc - CIC
2 cc
RI
Ab. 1027
Cifef
International organizations viadon
14-00000
L
STANDARD POCIM NO. 66
CRT
RITY INFORMATION
C-22
Office Memorandum
TO
FROM:
S/P Fr. Joyce
-
Vr. Barbour
•
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
DATE: Frey 19, 1952
SUBJECT: Fund Memorandum o. 62 of Docember 21, 1951 a taching copies of
document. rerarding the activities of the Central and Testern
Europea. Conference (Slavik-lajor Group)
Your attention is invited to subject memorsair which mates a
speech by Jerzy Lerski, Vice Chairman of the Polisa Fo'itical Council's
Working Committee in the United States, promosing the formation of a
domestic political pressure group of American resiuents of Bas ern
Curopea stock. In the course of his speech, l. Lerski repeats erd
endorses the official statement of Aims ad Principles of sieration
of Americans of Central and Cast European Descent. This statement,
particularly in its paragrapi. o. 3, proposes that their objectives
should be obtained through "unified political action."
The Department is obviously in complete support of their basic
objective, namely, the overthrow of Communism. coverer, we do perceive
real harm in the utilization of Ce funds to prozote domestic political
pressure groups; especially, when such crows will self-avom etge in
political and election contests in the United States in order to further
their objectives abroad.
Accordingly, we would surest that stens be taken to enstret.t
groups which are sponsored b or supported throth affiliation with
Co be restrained from participating in or assisting such uczestic
political pressure groups as is provosed in subject Sunder
..uc.. groups shoud be cautioned, in any event, to avoid any public
declarations of intent to intervene in dorestic berican politics.
5
DU:Pell:le
2/13 52
152
14-00000
PUMP HAC 12
SECRET
0-22
IVAT
we mber 31, 1951
DO
Attached to this memorandum are copies of doouuants
regarding the activities of the contral and Saotorn
European Conference (Slavik-Majer Grop).
(Peraki)
JAN 5 1954
SECRED
14-00000
ir,
1L
On behalf of "r. A. Cretaionu, hairman of the last
conference, and ir. Constantine otitch, daairaan of the
Serbian Hat: nal Committee, hair an of the next meeting
of the Central and astern wuropean Conference, I an in-
viting ou and your political friends to a neoting of the
12ill be held on Tuesday, Cocoaber 10, 1951 at
the Hotel illard, Executive Foom, Pennsylvania Ave. and
scht., Fashington, K.., at precisely 3 P..
The Agenda of the meeting will bes
1. hoport of the ocrotary General on the meetings of tho
Conoral committee on the action of the C350 on deperta-
tions, in ashington, New York, Faris, about the pres
conference in ashington, etc.
۰ Report of Br. Jersy Loraki (Vice Chairman of the
3.
Polish Political Council, orking Cousittee in the U.S.)
on collaboration with Americans of Hentral and Cast
uropean Foscent.
Report of ar. V. Stanka on orld "niversity.
The report of br. Lerski is attached to this invitation.
(signed) Dr. Juraj Flavik
Secretary General
Very sincerely yours,
ΙΑΣ
(Curicans of Central and Last -uropean Descent)
From Jarzy Loraki,
Political Council'e
2.3., 618 A Street,
ice hairman of the olish
orkin; Committee in the
..., Apt. 15, sahin:ton 3,..
The last three decades of the past century and the first two of
the present one, mark the period in ich millions of the immoverished
peasants of entral and astern rope case to the happy shores of froo
Aserica, There are ow at least twelve million US citisone of
Contral and ast.ropean dessert. 16 19, of course, a test careful
osticate. Congressman Kenneth . Leatin of Recaster, V. Y., in hig
14-00000
- 2 -
Extension of Hemarks in ...
ven
eed on toptenber
15th, 17'1, ives the total number of these loyal Americang"
an 20,000,200.- think it is rather too high an estimate.
if we would include all Jews from those areas the number could
hardly to higher than 15 millions this would be 17 of the total
population of the United States. This work seeking, economic
omiration from our countries was mainly concentrated in the big
cities and the great industrial or mining areas, of the sixteen
ast and 14-estern states of Pennsylvaria, ew Jersey, Colaware,
Maryland, ost First 18, Raw York, Connecticut, Shode Island,
Massachusetts, Bichigan, hebraoke, Chio, Indiana, Illinois,
consin and assota. In some of those states these curopeans
comprise about one third of the population. This applics especially
to ir cities such as Chicago, etroit, Cleveland, Toledo, jitts-
burgh, "cranton, Luffalo, ilkos Barre, Tronton, Kawark, Camden,
ritain, elo. no sho lẻ also mention that no that not less than one
how
18-
Fifth of 19 15 enigration managed to find work on farms--in
such states as disconsin, Hinnesots, Illinois, ilchigan, Hobraska,
assachusetts, and sew fork.
14 pollical importance of this great segnent of smarican
population is steadily increasing in the last twenty yours.
Hearly all the respective groups were concerned about the hone-
lanis of their fathers and grandfathers and became very active
during orld ar :. Although, ith the succeeding generations,
third or even fourth, this interest has waned, due to the natural
woakening of cies with the "old countries-these new Americans,
the sons and grandsons of the poor central and astern European
pesant catcranto ara conscious of their ancestry. Educated in
American colleges and universities, they are gradually emerging in
American putila Lifes their old inhibitive inferiority couplex is
rapidly disapearing. Let us study the ashin ton "slephone -irectory.
It is asterishing that at least every twolfta name is of "entral
Lastern Luropean dognent. I am not as familiar with other nationsl
groups and their achievements, but as far as Poles are concerned, ve
are proad to ve Hr. symczak as one of the covernors of the Federal
Heserve, ster Bukowski the newly appointed Lopatyirector of RF,
ir. bruk the sayor of Purale and er. Saalusta 'ayor of Toledo.
as sure 612ilar successes can be claimed by laor sroups of our
Contral and astern urean blow. net of these soricans are very
helpful if properly approached. •have card recently at a re-
coption eneral or-homorowski a atatant made by Hajor Alfred
3. lecinski a "emocratic Conresawan 'Fon Hew Jersey who offered
אור williness to help the exiled leaders ct all of our groups, in
our efforts to Liberate our part of the world. intlar statuents
hava ban nade by other on ressan of oilsh descent.
?
Me escial advance aant or sur American Crethren is visible
nearly 18 all spheres of oricar life, 11 1.a sole exception of
preparanta 1... ross, radio, lovision, "cllywood, to oven
there sase progress is bacticed.
hurch,
nivuries, 41 0.1tice the process of advancement is remarkable.
Americas c entral astorn opoanescent have proved to be
a'irst class reliable clemant as soldiers and citi69 0 110
Entted
Ta suchi-da..
tates in le tue worl ars and the present wost dangore.s
1dcological str. Io with cauti
14-00000
- 3 -
the
estimated total of the Central and Eastern European rem. lovaka
and Ukrainians compete for second place, having about one sillion
each, in the United States and Canada, Lithuanians and fungarians
seem to be next in line. It may be taken for ranted that all of
our national roups have at least a hundred thousand erican brothers
in this country. It is, and it should be a tronendous asset in our
struggle for liberation. In take my own relish group for example it
10 onccurain: to kror that thore ary already ten congresega of solish
Ceasant (asyon atorrate :۳۹ :
Inmouret of lehian, speaking at to laski rally in Detroit de-
clared a few weeks ago that "all congrasszon of Frolich descent, regard-
lees of party affiliations, are united in ac far as the cause of tree
Poland is concerned. According to him, as reported by the Polish
Anarican Journal No. 47-Vol. II of oventer 24th, 191-olish
Aevric an solons are workin together to invalidate the shorar and
Yalta agreements and to persuade the "nited States jovernsent to 50
on record favoring the present western boundaries of island. ef
other groapa lovenians have ano Congressman of their descent--young
and prominent ur. Blatnik from the fourth District of vi nesota.
Our sech friends can claim an old experienced member of the Foreign
Affairs Committee yr. Sabbath--"emocrat from Illinois, born in
Prague, and another con, rensnan ar, Stefan died recently. :p to now
there never was any U.S. Donator une could claim contral or castora
uropean ancestry, although enator Lancer was born of sochoslovak
Herman parents. Former cover or tangen claims sach ancestry and
Governor Leuscha Slovenian ancestry. There are several on reasmAR
of Jewish extraction who wore either born in our part of the world
or are of the cantern uropean parentago.
considered as potential friends of our suse.
o of them nay be also
A typical organisation in which we should be interested in our
work is that of Polish American Cross, os ablished early in 1944
with the main muross to help coland to regaining her torty and at
2:10 13:10 1ise to serve : .ho 'ont way the long rane interests of
toe nited taten by pointing out the dangers of Counter at Sussian
imperialism, "y taking such a dotorainod stand at the time hon tho
close tundship ich is so-cailor runt
1η senin-lon, they vo rundured a valuable service to its country.
Astera Ally vas proachod
Polish Americas on:ress is a sort of foderation of all is of
Jolish American organisati na sout of the coing of course 159urance
companies with olish mational Alliance.
million of ca.ital 13 he most powerful. ם לטיניomers and 70
cational, or church and veteran roapo,
struale for Justice for oland.
Thay joined to other in a
rolish-American Congress se the
cooperation of about 50 oltan-American newscapers in this country.
studying the problem : found that there axles parallel e-cant-
tions of other national го рв.
similar.
Their structural basis are also very
:besano better acquainted with the merican :entarian
Lederation. Though organised as long ago as 1000 at
it
ow has anson: its principal Aine and purposes
loveland Convention,
the Constitution and laws of the mitad tat---th all to 11.0000
*Ic support---thin
movements aiming to bring about independence for un.ary well
Liberty and well being for its maple and to do everythingesettle to
protect the human stats and citisonship of the unrlan ciarlaced
poreone outside of Hungary."
As the
olish ortation le
14-00000
- 4 -
douinated Ly the vigorous and colorful personality of Charles
Legnare
icas en is the Hungarian odoration by its
enorrotic zortiva asrotary tephan.. aloch from ashington,
The rainian sa ross Committee of America is another very
active body ander the chairmanship of young soononiet gr. Lov
Cobriansky from Seorgetown in vorsity.
The above montioned thrie organisations togoor with the
Byelorussian - American sociation, An rican arpets- oras,
etted marican Croatians, and the Clovak League curica are
apansoring a Federation of oricand of contral and Cast Luropean
Cescent, tin tuo Conduarters at 12h yo Street, K., Jeshinaton
"
which is at the ance time the Has of the igri-lunarian
edorstion. It is a young orisation in its initial period of
ambitious stivities. Its officers uleated on April 1951 at the
Hudson Hotel - 304 Cack Conference aro Stephen. Thach (Carpatno-
Ruthenian)-president, r. Lev obriansky (of Ukrainian descont)--
Vice President, Charles hoamarek (of Polish descent-Treasurer.
Hembers of the Board of Directorsi Cephen. balogh fof Hungarian
descent), John Lichayonack, thilip trobak--Recordiez "ecretary,
Ur. Losins for Latvian descent), Hav. Milvije rubisic (of Croatian
descent) and stephen. Skubik (of Ukrainian descent)--bureau
Lanager. Joseph A. Jackovics (of lovak descent, was hederation's
Socretary General cut accused by other officers fer is tendency to
turn the ederation into a mere tool of kaablican party machine he
was forced to resign. It is not to be overlooked that the laderation
is at the noxent under stron: Ukrainian influence. The offloors of
the oard of Irectors saulain that rognarok rover attended a
meating of theirs 3: אמר "r. Charles urke from the ashington
Office of the jolish merican Congress deputines only in the character
ef an obeerver. 1948onco do facts of the solish-rican ogress
בריםreally haziers to a large extent the adoration's activities.
(The reason for is a sonce will to explained orally).
ros
escent ad ted
According to an official tatamnt of las and Frinciples of
"odoration of 4-orleans of Contral and fast
at the "oard of irectors Feeling held in Dashington on August 17,
19.1 there are as follows:
1. To exert every effort to defend the Constitution of our
Americanay : 1150. Ta en'are and oxorcise every weasure of effort
and resource toward the decisivo defeat of auntien osouniot
imperialism which in its room sendo aos 4 creal threat to
the moral and intellectual ridian Conditions of western civili-
zation in watch is poolted our pricelusa herican way of life.
2. To coordinate and implement the conson and anal activities
of the numerous sombor or a ratione represented are within the
scope of a unified political action oriented toward the eyeteastia
realisation of tis basic objective and the simultaneus world-wide
extension of the spiritual at once, any linuation if the serving
of ecuplaints will be simply a susture of deantorial leasin
engendered in ear Pill of sights, to formila of self-determined
freedem and the tlantic Charter
14-00000
- 5 -
3. do serve and assist through such unified political action
the aropriate agencies of our Government and various collaborating
Ausrican anti-Communist orta ixations in the dissemination of
authentic information on Soviet Russien tyranny and atrocity behind
the iron curtains of Central surope and Asia, in the promulation of
necessary stops aimed at the formation of a global netwerk of antt-
Communist alliances, notably within the Soviet spire, in the formu
lation of political objectives adapted to the historie requiremonte
and aspirations of the peoples available as our natural allies, and
in the persistent counteraction of binister Communist and other anti-
donocratio influence and groups in our domestica environment.
::
b. to promote the security and welfare of the United States
by Lasisting upon policies which are shaped in terms of a scrupulous
and forthrtint observance of the sacred principles cabodied in the
aforementioned monuments to the liberal human spirit and watch will
insure lasting peace to all the nations of the world, tacluding those
of central and Eastern urope, naabering approximately 155,00,000
people.
Co arge our Jovernment to sack the restoraston of sovereign
rights and self-government to the nations which have been forcibly
deprived of them and to secure the exercise of the fundamental right
of sulf-satarmination for those nations which have not in the past deon
accorded this right, particularly in the countries of Central and
pastora urope..
6. to tapel, on the happy occasion of the liberation of all
pooples from the yoke of orist aussian imperialism, Covernmental action
to fulfill the guaranty of free and unfestored elections in those
countries under the supervision of the 'nited Nations and with strict
rogard for conditions of population distribution existing prior to the
institution of the kuseification policy bent on the extinction of
the national identities of the respectiva enslaved countries.
7. Recognising the twofeld naud, vise ridding all countries
involved of implanted Soviet influence, together with ultivate solu-
tion of territorial boundary disputes, it is urged that strict priority
of action be extended to the former consideration.
8. To abot forcefully the realisation of the preceding objective
and concomitantly contribute to the prevention of a generally
disastrous world war 111 through the vizorous advancement of psycho-
10.:ical warfare, with particular emphasis on ourgtantial improvements
in the status and function of the Voice of America, roscandin; procla-
mation of norican Friendship and support of the liberatin; movements
0144-in throughout the wide peripheral uropean and Asiatic area of
non-tusstan poopies 1uporialistically subjugated in the Soviet empire,
and demands or true representation of these enslaved peoples in the
councils of the "aited Nations.
9.
secure maximun and uastiating aid on the part of our
Hovernment for the tanifold operations and the potentially unlimited
dapansion of the ander.ground promunta Lehind the iron curtains of
Zurope and Asia.
Thouch any of the proclaimed ales seem to be identical with
14-00000
- 6 -
those of ours there are also at the normal several serious obstacles
for cur alone cooperation on our and the Federation.
two bolios Christo diferent cational gro.ps. wcze of the
nationalities present in : have not their counterparts in the
ederation as is the case of sache, steaiane, koumaniacs and Serbs.
The efforts are made to bring these national roups within the scheme
of the "oderation. On the other side "krainians, Carpatho-kathontans,
Syelorussians, and Slovak autonomists are not represented in our
Committee. It should be stressed also that some of the corresponding
now onioration Froupe, of the last mentioned nationalities are being
considered by our friends from 88 cooperative due to their
soparatistic tendencies. I realise that the thorny problem of the
Independence of the some of the mentioned nationalities cold hardly
be at the prosent moment introduced in 26. I would be inclined to
suggest that as many of our izsediate, siasare similar to those of
the Federation, regardless of sono substantiel differences we should
take advantage of such a large body of organised American friends
eagerly Interested in the liberation of our respective countries
within the whole area of Central-Zastorn.rope. The same would apply
of course to all component national organizations of the Federation
such as for instance Polish Ausrican Co gress which is not yet closely
linked with the Federation. I would suggest that as all our groups
have already established their liaison officers to appoint a liaison
to The odoration of Americans of Contrai and Cast suropean essent
in order to be inforped start their activities and to represent there
our point of view. Suah a cooperation may be of a great importance
in wany fields. 1 na sure that all these American or aninations would
be willing to help us in ricin; bofore the free world the problems
o: Deportations and forced Labour la cur part of the world, as our
Polish American Congress was very helpful to bringing the Katyn
Forest massacre into the iht of the fres opinion, Let us use our
American brothers not only in such othervies vital nervices as
sonding millions of food and clothing persele behind the Iron Curtain
or signing tons of thousands of affidavits and jeb assurances for
Simplaced fersons. Let us ecoperate with tea as close as po08110
in the post important political problems of car strugle for freedom.
Ashes we are
The principal political isso facing as in that respost is
that of pressing for a "Liberation Folicy of the Insted
other Fentorn suapro.
tates and
ith the approach of eventer 1967 slections
it is becoming obvious to all of a that it will be of extreme lapor-
tance for the cause of curarea sho will be plected as the nen
logislatorn of the United States.
interfere into Amarican domestic politics, as sopresentives of our
et allowed to
countries we are deeply interested in whose hands the rate and the
future of the world events is doing to the is the years to come.
is now a commonplace to state that moviet rassia and the united
will decide the fundamental, universal issues in wish cur countrie
are so much concerned--!iberty or
this should be a altor o
lavery, e cileve deeply that,
COMO: 1nterest to se and to the citizens
of the to
tatoo.
orothea;ust a shortsightedness
Tot to rentes as in 1 : :ecisivo atruie for the very existence
of our nations we are lucky to possa here cowerful and understandin
Allies in at least 1 million A-orica 0:04:
uropean coscont.
entral-estern
are equally anger as ourselves in trincia:
14-00000
- 7 -
freedom back to our part of the world. A good Amrican citizens,
Lax-payers, soldiers and workers they are fully untitled to sustain
us in our 'forts to litorate our countries. erardions of party
affiliations we shuild sport our faithful friends and to patoh
our enemies. Sucy a polteras apled mutatio mutante by Fican
Labour Chicne in the case of the Tart Hartley Fot, when all candidates
for the seat in the House of apresentatives or Conste and state
Governorships, regardless of their party competency, have been asked
for their stand in that aster and their record of voting was shocked
from the point of view. Such is the basic technique of the prasaure
policy in the country. Applied to oreign affairs it won't be either
a now thing in the United States. It is a well known fact that the
organised Jews of New York and other big american cities have montly
contributed to the miraculous re-amor.conce of the fres state of Israel.
Irich-an ricane sustain vigorously the national claim for a United
Ireland. The three hyphenate" "roupe of Azarican-armane, Irish
and talians are mainly recreible for the oventful abolition of
12nonian era of Fations policy. But, in our case, we do not want
to costros anything our six is constructive. o nood our American
friends and relatives to corporate with us for a positive purpose of
Liboration. Tuts nay be is the United States the most powerful way
of changing the catastropic trend of American policy in respect of
Lastera -uropean problems. I see no reason why millions of Americans
of Contral Contr Esterhuropean Cescent should not demand openly from
their futuro lugislators what stand have they taken in regard of
liberation of our countriess (Are you for, are you sainst, or are
you just neutral")--what care they done to materialise such a libera-
tion in their past activities, what and in which way do they intend
to do in future Such a ssstionnaire way 'n very useful in reviving
our issue bolore American political circles and the wide 110
opinion. To some of us 1: azy asem too bold an initiative, Howevor
if we really are of the opinion that without the speedy liberation of
Contral-Castern urope-shte anificent country of the "citud
cannot survive either as a happy and frue land then by the raising
of the Liberation cause we are in this respect not only fulfilling
our duties towards our respective countriesbut also a worthy service
for the free people of America.
14-00000
20 March 1952 W
KIMOPATRA FOR: Chief, Coutheastern Europe Avision
Chief, Eastern Europe 171sim
UJCT
Future of trastourg Free Farope
University tudenta
1. Attached hereto is a copy of a lot'er I an
forwarding to Dr. Tyson on this subject.
2. Chief EF is on record as having steed the
formor case officer of TITNIC that FE should be
afforded an opportunity for evaluation and covert
sorcering of studante of origin for future potential
operational we, on the understanding that no student
would be aptrosched for this program during his samled
term at the University. ' probably has a similar
intereas in this matter.
3. This randua te to ok that yes
Inforved on a continuin basis of yar viens teic abject,
and als to let you mo th t you can expect from us the
Information which shall come to ca in renly to the attach
cant.
4. Any comments wtch you now hi ve on this subject
and would rive to me either informally tywny by
15 April, vald be appreciated.
Attachment
THA FRAC
Chief
Intem ti nal Organisations ivision
Crobl
Ustributions
Orig &1-Addreases
1 - CIO
2-RI
- Froject file/
14-00000
In reply reiar W-1927.
tos
20 Farch 1952
:
Fear Leverings
I have rest with ruch intereat the account you recs::tly
sont to Pr. "Acemod on the University in trarbourg.
I huve also noted that in a recent Fund Hexoranchn
-(Sc. 385), the que tien vas raised as to that should be done
with the tribourg tu ents after they have or leted their
studios, should no o cortunity mercat itself for their
rotum to liberated countries of their origin.
In any care, this question will be of continuing concorn
to both your organization and oure, and I hope that ve any be
mutually helpful in lan: 'az hov wa can make use of taro
students after the completion of their studies in Strasbourg.
Towards this effort ve should accrociato receiving from you
a list of the present aturent body at Strasbourg together
with idographical data and expected co plotia o' sluty d. tes
for each. Ve chailaiso like to have a statement as to the
tyre of contract antonad lato Ith the stuents arul ar to ary
coligation i posed wra those enroll. I should like to
discuss this que tion with you from time to time and certiou
Larly after receiving the infcreation herein requested.
My continued test wi.bes
CION Vibl
Distributi as
Adressee Addre.see-1
1- CIO
2. RI
1- Froject file/
"Incorely,
Oilver Hadvood
14-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTED CONFISTIA
SENDER WILL CIRCLE CLASSIFICATION TO. AND BOTTOM)
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
TO
1
Miss Viccellio
2
3
4
5
FROM
1
2
3
CIO
INITIALS DATE
INITIALS
TWB
DATE
18 Mar
APPROVAL
INFORMATION
SIGNATURE
ACTION
DIRECT REPLY
RETURN
PREPARATION OF REPLY
DISPATCH
RECOMMENDATION
FILE
CONCURRENCE
REMARKS:
Are any of the officers of this organi-
zation on our cleared consultants list?, I
believe you understand the situation, which
is that it may be a good thing to try a direct
approach to this group on behalf of NCFE.
Mr. Bun
No, Sir
Nanen
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
RESTRICTED UNCLASSIFIED
FORM NO.
SEP 1947
30.4
14-00000
RET
MATION
19 March 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
-SUBJECTI
Crusade for Freedom and National Infomation Bureau
1. On January 10th I called your attention to the fact that
the National Infomation Pureau, a reputable investigation agency
which conducts inquiries into charitalle organizations and advises
large donors, had given an adverse recommendation on the Crusade
for Freedom (see Attachment 1). This matter has now risen again.
It may be that it would be wise to undertake a high-level approach
to the Bureau through yourself or General Smith, for the following
reasons
According to an agreement with us and with the State
Department at our recent meetings, Crusade for Freedom will bank
heavily this year on donations from corporations. They have now
discovered that these corporations rely to a great extent on the
National Information Eureau's advice. Several corporations have
indicated thei, according to their practice, they cannot give to
the Crusade unless it has the blessing of the Eureau, and you will
note in Attachment 2 that one such corporation -- Barnes Hanufactur-
ing Company of Mansfield, Ohio - has written to the Crusade citing
its doubt.
2. Meantime, members of the Crusade have had conversations
with D. Paul Reed, Executive Director of the National Information
Pureau (see Attaciunent 3) and he has insisted that ne cannot report
that the Crusade nas met the basic standards in philanthropy until
his Standards 7 and 8 are