104-10174-10037
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
L February 1960
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
05
SUBJECT: Meeting with (Henry P. Lopez) at the Statler-Hilton Hotel on
1 February 1960 from 1000 hours to 1530 hours.
03
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
1. Those present were (Vidal) FP/PA, (Alexander Hunter) (Williams)
PP/PAD, Charles Penney (Weiss) WII/PW, and (Philip Toomey) (Thompson) H4/PP.
03
2. Mr. (Lopez) gave a report of his contacts in Cuba after receiving
his notes which were brought up by (Noel) and given to Hr. (Lopez) by
(Coomer). (Lopez) said that he had given biographical sketches of
Echevarria, Rasco, Laureano Batista, Martinez Fraga, Ruben de Leon and
Sanchez Arengo to the Station representative. He had also turned over a
report of Martinez Fraga on the aims of the "Insurreccion de la Revolucion".
5
3. Mr. (Lopez) report was taped and a transcript will be forwarded
to by PP/PA.
4. Specific recommendations made by Mr. (Lopez) included having
Herbert Matthews go to Havana and try to influence Castro. Matthews
has a good reputation throughout the 25th of July Movement and could
help in an approach to Castro. A visit by Ed Murrow to do a broadcast
on Cuba was also recommended. Mr. (Lopez) feels that Castro will be in
power for a long time to come and that we should try to influence him.
He is seriously affected by any defections and these might be encouraged.
Castro can be hit by defections of overworked and countermanded officials.
Two men who were mentioned as ripe for defection are (Ufo) in Hacienda
and (Cepero) in Comercio. Mr. (Lopez) also recommended contact with Padre
Alberto de Castro in Caracas. This padre was formerly Fidel's instructor.
When Fidel was in Caracas he was scolded by Padre Castro whom Fidel
treated with great respect according to (Esco). The Padre and Fidel spent
about one and one half hours alone together at this time. This priest
should be checked as a possible influence on Fidel. The possibility of
a split between Fidel and Raul should be exploited. Raul is cold and
mean and the fact that he is Fidel's brother does not carry too much
weight.
SECRET
14/N
08