14-00000
104-10173-10078
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
17 June 1963
CONTACT REPORT: VASLOUCH/2, DI UBALDO, and DORENOSE
DATES
19 & 20 May 1963
PLACE
1
Sende Hotel
Miami Beach, Florida
1. DOMENOSE and DI UBALDO arrived by taxi at the Banda
Rocal at approximately 2330 hours and in the lobby passed the
Subject, her traveling companion, Ars. DI SILVA (mother of
Brasilien charge GAMBOA) and Mr. & Mrs. Kurt PLASTEREK (360
Contact Report dated 3 May 1963) with whom they had spent the
ovening. While the two ease officers were negotiating rocas
with the deak clerk, VASLOUCH/2 made a point of asking for her
key which indicated bar room musder and the case officere vara
therefore able to get rooms on the floor just below hers.
(MOTE: Our contacts with VASLOUCH/2 were dependeat upon the
amount of time she could spend away from her unwitting traveling
companion.) As previously arranged, DI UBALDO went to the
Subject's hotel room at 0700 hours the nest morning and brought
bar to his room where the debriefing took place. At the out-
est DOREMOSE was introduced as Willian Clins and it was explained
tha? DI UBALDO was moving out of the operation. This initial
mesting which lasted until 0900 hours was confined primarily to
two copies, one, VASLOUCH/1's contact with and cultivation of
Francisco SANCHEZ who is charged with scas road building projects
Rood
1
SECRET
701-285412.1
14-00000
SECRET
in Oriente Provinco and who is a closo associate of Dr. Rans
VALLEJO, a key advisor to CASTRO and two, the recent social
cultivation of the VASLOUCHES by an officer of the Soviet Embassy.
The facts developed on the second subject are as follows: For
several years VASLOUCH/2 had been contacted at the Brasilian
Embassy by Valentine S. LOGUINOV, an attache at the Soviet
Rabsesy. These conteeta took place every two or three months
when LOCUINOV would bring visa requests from his Anbassy. The
last of these business contacts was in February of this year.
On 27 April, while VASLOUCH/2 was in lexico City, LOGUINOV
X
phoned the Brazilian Ambassy asking for VASLOUCH/2 and when
informed that she was not in, requseted her boas phone mader
(alisted) from the girl answering the phone, Hilde BOLIVAR
(girl friend of SANCHEZ). The girl refused to give out the
mmber. et 1000 ca 1 May, LOCUTROV apparently having acquired
the number from the consuler list, called VASLOUCH/2 at her
hose only to be told that VASLOUCH/2 was working that morning
at the Brasilian Babassy. He finally got VASLOUCH/2 on the
telephone at 1600 houre and stated that the date vas an
Laportant holiday for him and that he wished to visit the
VASLOUCHES with his fasily to bring a small present for VARIOUCH/2.
LOGUINOV and family arrived at VASLOl1/2's how at 1300 hours
and stayed until 2100 hours. The prelimt was a bottle of "Red
2
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Hoscow parfuse. The evening was confined to all talk. On
3 May, LOCUINOV again called and made a dinner date with.
VASLOUCH/2 and her husband for 10 May. LOCUIROV and wife picked
1
up the VASLOUCHES in their private ear and the evening (2130 -
0030) was spent at the Capri Restaurant. Because of the noise
from the floor show, again little of note was discussed. The
cost of the meal was approssimately $10. At the restaurant,
LOCUIKOV Lnvited the VASLOUCHES to attend a reception and showing
of the Soviet passenger place, TU-114, to be held at 12:30
14 May. VASLOUCH/2 did not attend because cha vas leaving for
Miani. When VASLOUCH/1 telephoned VASLOUCH/2 in Nisat on 17 May,
be contioned, in German, that Valentine had again dropped by.
Frea these contacts with LOGUINOV the following had been
observed by VASLOUCH/2. He is approximately 32 years old,
speake fluent Spanish with just a slight sccons and a little
English. He has been in Cuba three years and was fluent in
Spanish when he arrived. He is approximately 6 feet tall, weighs
about 185 lbs., strongly built, has blue eyes, blond wavy hair,
concave forehand, good sooth, and dresses well ash cost and
mosktis. Na drives himself in an American ear (Dodge?) with
non-diplocatie plates. lle scokes and drinks in moderation. He
has a three and one half year old sou, an eleven year old
daughter and his parentes and his wiln's parents are living ia
Moscow. His wife's name is Alenaadva, she is attractive and
works in the consular office. Har immiten is poor. Ha vas
aware that VASLOUCH/2 had visited Hosle recently and also know
that the VABLOCKES daughter as vith, the Brasilien Babassy la
1
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Moscow. Also that VASLOUCH/I had recently been back to Finland.
One thing that stayed in 1/2's mind was thet in conversation
with LOGUINOV he referred on three occasions to the possibility
that their daughter might very well marry a Russien, a point
that might relate to any operational approach LOGUINOV may
make to the VASLOUCHES. V/2 stated that LOGUINOV was the only
one that had ever come to the Brasilien Babassy regarding visas.
She also stated that over the past years she has called his
office four or five times regarding vises and has never beon.
able to reach him. 7/2 also recalled that during their outing
at the Capri Restaurant LOGUINOV stated that he was planning to
rent a beach house and was looking forward to the VASLOUCHES
spending time with his and his wife there during the summer
months. 7/1 Inquired as to the whereabouts of the former
PRAVDA correspondent, Borovsky, and was told he was in Moscow.
2. The Finnish Ambassador in Hashington has been kept
Informed en LOGUINOV's advances toward the SLOUCHES. His only
comment at this point was that "they are after something." V/2
hes sovised CAMPOA whose reaction has beca to encourage the
relationship in hopes of acquiring soma political information
from LOCUINOV. The Finnish Ambassador also detailed/that/dating-
PALAR/ALLNg/af/ stated in his telephone conversatica with V/2
in Hiasi that he had requested that the SLOUCHES installation
ba elevated and given diplocatie: status. Ho expressed amprise
that stoppy of his letter to Alho Cuban Foreign Ministry had not
4
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
been received by V/1 and proaised a special delivery copy of
it to 1/2 in Miami, Relating to this, 1/2 stated to the C/C
that to one of vil's meetings with CORONA of the Foreign Office,
CORONA stated that he was requesting Helsinki to raise the
status of ito representation in Havana and to post a charge
there. V/2 was told by the C/O that after checking with
Headquarters concerning LOCUINOV's background, specific guldanes
on how to handle the relationship would be forthcoming.
!
!
3. From SANCHEZ, V/i elicited road building informaation
which he had put on an overlay which was passed by V/2 (sant
to SAS Reports), SANCHEZ bad invited. 7/1 to Orienta Province
with him in the near future to see some of his projects.
Reluctantly we instructed V/2 to tell v/1 to turn down the
invitation on grounds of ill health but to leave the way open :
for a similar invitation in the future. It was thought that
this was best until we could assess LOGEINOVIS interest in the
VASLOUCHES. V/2 alse passed the war names V/1 bad assigned to
his principaleontacts and a diagram of the Brazilian Babassy
including measurements of the out building which DI UBALDO had
discussed with V/2 in Mexico City relating to its possible usa
as a deed drop. A pamphlet entitled, blas of Experta and
Immorte of Cuben Zozolza Ikada Bakezuriase, also was passed.
(Seat to SAS/Reports.) A list of art passed shoved numbers
and some other data on linse passengers which had departed
Cube in two Cubana flights to Brasil for the purpose of picking
up the Cuban sports teen In Brazil (annt es SAS/RE).
1- :
3
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
4. On 19 May DI. UZALDO returned to washington, DORENOSE
set with V/2 on 20 May, from 0700 - 0900 hours. At this meeting,
4/2 was given the KEYWAY sterile phone number and told that all
future contacs should be made to Cline using this number. She
was also given our initial assessment of the significance of
LOGUINOV's approach (the traces from Headquarters had still not
been received). In our opinba there were three possibilities
and two of them vero unlikely. First, LOGUINOV's approsch
could be an innocent one and be merely for the purpose of
establishing a friendship, an extension of this thought would
be the possibility of its interesting in defecting. Given the
aga difference in the two couples and weighing other factore,
this was considered unlikely. The second possibility is that
the Soviets have been alerted, possibly by V/1's open code
cable to Finland, to the Stoucias possible involvement with
the Americans. This also is unlikely for had this bean the core
the last thing the Soviets would wish to do would be to alert
1.
the SLOUCHES to the fact that they wen ander suspicion and
back
therefora bring about a cut An their mitivithe. (COMMENT:
LOGUINOV's sudden and fairly intensin tultivation effort hes
had just this effect.) The third and use likely possibility
is that the Sovieta ara cultivating 1/2 liruas as a penetration
of the Brastiian Babassy. V/2 accepitud the case officer's
:
6
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
assessment as valid and in keeping with her own thoughts. She
was told that final guidance on this matter would be given her
at e subsequent soeting to be held in the afternoon after
DORNOSE had received the Headquarters traces. The discussion
then went to the communications.
6. When the subject stated that her husband was unable
to bring out either the pads or his Lastructions on how to use
the pads which had been given him in New York, it was decided
to issue two redused size OTP's concealed in a shaving kit.
8/W Instructions on the use of the CTP would be passed by
BARKAR in Mexico City. She was told that BARKER would be in
the lobby of the Hilten Hotel in Mexico City at 0730 on 23 Hay.
When they have recogalzed osch other abe should follow his froa
the Hotel. If BARKER is unable to make the acatect he is to
tolephone her later in the day noing the name BETO. Subject was
told that we were unable to come up, as yet, with an extended
das1-earphone sot which she had requested, but this would be
available for the next contect later in the summer.
7. Toward the end of the westing, Subject passed trans-
lations she had made of notes given her by V/1 which he believed
to be of intelligence interest.
They are included as Atzachsent
A). Unfortunately, Das was able to review these reports
with her but she was pursuaded bi tarn over Finnish language
motes and the carben copy of 7/18 latter to his anbassador
(a translation of which is Attas/litant 3). The C/O requested
the name of a person in Halalar to would have reasca to write
to 1/1 but who is not doing so 41: A present time. She gave
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
the nase of V/1's aunt, Kaisa RAIKKONEN,
She was told that some
of the incoming S/W in the future would be written in Finnish,
mailed in Helsinki, and ostensibly come from this person.
Subject stated that she would depart Miami by Guest Airlines
on 22 May 1963. The meeting was conducted hurriedly and
necessarily and conchuded at 0900 hours. Plans were made for
the Subject to return for a brief contact with DORENOSE between
1430 and 1600 hours after finding sono excuse to get away from
her companion.
8. Subject was unable to break away from her companion
in time to make the scheduled meeting and when she telephoned
to so cotify DORENOSE she was erroneously Laforsed by the hotel
desk that DORINOSE bud checked out. After some difficulty,
DORKNOSE was able to contact her and a brief resting was hold
at 2100 hours. It was at this meating that instructions were
givan V/2 to tighten up on their security citing the dangers
of audio-surveillance and the necessity for great care when
mailing the letters out. For her benefit, KUBARK security in
dealing with her case van emphasised. She was also ilustructed
to react with disbelief numbined with Indignation if a recruit
mant pitch was made to either of thes. She was also urged not
to incourage further sociul contact with the LOCUINOV's in
hopes that LOGUINOV would lose interest. She was advised that
her daughter should be entouraged to Liave Moscow if the
8
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Brazilian tabaccador de cransferred in late fell. If this does.
not come off, when 1/2 visits her daughter in the fall she should
attempt, under sane pretext, to have her daughter leave Russia.
the Impression
The case officer was careful not to alarm 1/2 and to convey that
her daughter's present plight had no relation to her intelligence
Lnvolvement with ODYOKE. On the contrary, she was very fortunate
to have us to advise her on how best to deal with her problen.
V/2 was concerned about her daughter because her daughter had
not socially with en ODACID officer in Hoscos named Richard
Jacobs who has olnas been pag'd by the Soviete, when asked
about other coutects of her daughter's in Moscow she stated
that her daughter was in love with one of the WAR Rabassy
secretaries who had left Moscow and was presently assigned in
Tokyo. She mentioned that another UAR secretary statoned in
Moscow named SALAH and the Consular, Asia Haase were acquaintances.
Also a secretary of the Mexican Bobassy named Areando CANTU.
She mentioned that during her scheduled fall viett to see her
daughter she had presteed to take her daughter to Tokyo to
visit hor boy friend. This was complicated however because this
would Lafuriste 7/1 who is strongly against the daughter marrying
a Moslem. Subject was given $50. to off-ser taxi fares, the
cost of an antenne, and for good will. The meeting was con
cluded at 2107 shen Hrs. Da SILVA was scheduled to get out
of the bathtub. Two other names of possible interest were
9
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
raised by V/2 during the coutset. Bila HONKARALA, a Finnish
fozele student in Havana and a radid Cosmuntat and John. RETITI,
an English national met by 7/2 La Marico City. RETTI, a writer
for the "Seancaist and an employee of the BBC was once warried
to a Firm. RETTI was being assigned in Havana. His address
in Naxico City: P.O. 1642 Mexico City 1, Mexico. Telephone
mumber, 14-32-25.
1.0
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
1. Source:
Planca Nogueras Ficero (subsource not indicated).
Spare parts from Freland are sent to Monterey (Mexico), then to
Yucatan and after that to Isles Materas and from there the Cuben
fisherman cake them to the Isle of Pines.
2. Source: Francisco Sanchez, Cuban road construction
engineer in discussing procurement of replacement parts for his
equipmant stated if the Americans have a subsidiary factory, for
example Catapillar, with a factory in Europe, the spare parts are
sent to East Germany and from there to Cuba,
3. Source: Blanca The Headquarters of the Russians 19
in a tunnel at 36th Street, No. 62 on the corner of Street 39.
It has two entrances, one from the river and the other from the
house of M. J. DlAz.
4. Source: Blanca
de los Paños,
There to a Tlushin 28 in San Antonio
5. Source: Blanca - A former National Assembly (to mote:
or Cuban equivalent) member, Diez Madrazo, stated that the refugee
ship that went to Florida on 29 Apr/carried two goverment agents,
Jose Diaz (el cojo) and huwife Yolanda Claneros, whose address,
is No. 7414 Avenue 15.
6. Orlando Puente, the private secretary of former President
Prio, approached CAMTOA's mother in Miami on 19 Mav stating that
before she departed the country he would give her the name.of.a
Cuban associate of Prio who is in much trouble and wants asylim.
in the Brazilian Embassy.
7. Source: VASLOUCH/1 on 4 May Eduardo Corone, Chief of
the Occidental Furopean Countries Office stated to StoCH/L that he
planned in the rear future to give a luncheon for the Northern
European diplomats and at that lurcheon lie would purpose that the
Northern countries put on an exposition in Cuba covering each countries.
cultural and economic achieverents.
SECRET

