14-00000
104-10182-10003
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME:
WIROOVE
201-233477
BULKY
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
DATE
RECEIVED
DATE
RETURNED
REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME)
SIGNATURE OF, REVIEWING OFFICIAL
27 JULY 78
DAN HARDWAY
Da
27 JULY 18
E LOPEZ
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE
ΤΟΣΑΜΙΝΑΤΙΟN AGREEMENT
The undersigned hereby acknowledges that a contractual relationship
has heretofore re existed between him and the Government of the United States
of America (hereinafter referred to as ("the Goverraent"). The Government
has fully and completely satisfied all of its obligations to the undersigned.
:
The undersigned on behalf of himself, his heirs, executors, administra-
tors and assigns hereby releases and forever discharges the Government, its
officers, agents and employees from any and all debts, clains, benefits or
demands arising out of the above mentioned contractual relationship.
The undersigned fully understands and appreciates the fact that the prior
relationship between the parties and all information and knowledge acquired in
the course of said relationship (particularly with reference to persons and
methods employed employed by the Government) are the property of said Government and
constitute military secrets affecting its security. The undersigned knows and
understands that these are protected by German I rman Lav under the provisions of
Annex A to the Convention on Rights and Obligations of Foreign Forces in the
Federal Republic of Germany.
The Government is highly appreciative of the excellent services hereto-
fore rendered by the undersigned. However, to preserve the security above
mentioned, it is further understood and agreed that both parties shall here-
after disavow that the relationship ever existed.
The undersigned further agrees he possesses no right, title or interest
in any information or knowledge arising out of said relationship and he fur-
ther solemnly swears that he will never divulge, publish or reveal by word,
conduct or any other means the fact of said relationship nor any such knowledge
For information arising therefrom except as authorized in writing by the sane
official of the Government as that who witnesses this oath.
Frankfort/Main
is this day of Marche 196
Georg F. Sanders
(L.S.)
WITNESS:
William Miman
000
S-B-C-R-E-T
PEPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
DATE:
30 September 1964
TIME:
1030 1400 hours
PLACE:
Automobile in the Vicinity
of Kuhwaldstr.
ARTHUR A LIFALL, Case Officer
COMMENTS:
WIROGUE called at approximately 0945 hours on the Stage I
Ops phone and asked for Mr. Murmann. C.O. took the call and was
advised that the caller was "Dave" and that he desired to speak
to a colleague of Mr. Murmann at the earliest possible time.
C.O. made arrangements to meet him in front of the safe house
at 51 Kuhwaldstr which WIROGUE occupied during his 1 1/2 year
association with HARVARD (this is no longer a HARVARD safe house).
C.O. did not tell Dave" his name over the telephone and indicated
that he would be able to recognize "Dave". C.O. picked "Dave"
up on the corner of Volta and Kuhwaldstr and drove a couple of
blocks to a parking place where the conversation took place.
:
C.O. learned that WIROGUE was no longer employed by the
Bochler Company in Munich. He apparently has had a couple of
factory jobs since that job and is currently unemployed.
According to "Dave" he is without work, without friends, without
money and" only contacted Murmann's old office because he is
at the end of his rope". Subject stated that he had tried hard
to find suitable employment in Germany, but that there was
absolutely nothing available which he could do. It was obvious
that WIROGUE wished to renew his association with the AIS and that
"intelligence work" was the only kind of employment for which he
felt himself really qualified. When C.O. indicated to him that the
employment possibilities had not changed since WIROGUE was told
there was no possibility of future employment with the Agency,
Subject said that the purpose of his telephone call was to advise
us of his plans to go to Paris and attemon to contact the
French Intelligence-Service-to-which he would-offer his services.
He wished to find out if we would have any objections to his
seeking employment from the French or possibly the British since
we are apparently unable to utilize him further. C.O. said that
obviously WIROGUE would do what he would do and that while we
had no control over his actions it would seem a bit surprising
that he would delibertely place himself in the hands of the
French authorities where he was known to have a criminal record.
WIROGUE implied that he would obviously tell all to the French
and indicated that he was not concerned about any actions that
they would take against him. He appeared sure in an extremely
vague and confused way that the French Intelligence Service could
use him.
14-00000
In the course of the lengthy discussions WIROGUE let it
be known that he was not very happy about the treatment he
had received from the Americans--that he felt he had been
dropped, and it appeared obvious to C.O. that if we had no
further work for him he was threating to tell his story to the
French authorities--a story which he presumably feels we would
not like the French to know about. It should be stressed that
at no time was the "blackmail threat" bluntly presented. It was
merely that he wished to advise us of his plan to leave for
Paris this date with this intention in mind and that he wished
to determine if we had any "objections".
7
C.O. xafasad reviewed with WIROGUE the considerable efforts
which had been made to assist him in establishing a new life here
in the FEDREP-- a new life story, legal documentation, the kopaxta
taak opportunity to look for employment for a period of more than
a year while receiving subsistence from us, etc. C.O.told
Subject that he obviously had a good mind and was in good health
and that--if he was unable to find some type of employment in
the thriving West German economy that appealed to him there and
satisfied him--he would probably be unhappy wherever he goes.
C.O. discounted Subject's beliefs that "intelligence work" was
the only thing for which he was suited. C.O. ap expressed the view
that he should get his head out of the clouds and his feet on
the ground--that he should find a job, however entrar, and throw
himself into it. At this point WIROGUE said that at one time
he had told Mr. Murmann of his desire to become a driver or
chauffer but that Mr. Murmann told him he could find much more
suitable employment. With a certain amount of disbelief C.O.
pursued this topic with him telling. WIROGUE that-Bif he were was
really serious thatxha in believing that this kind of employment
would be satisfying to him, that it was the first sensible thought
he had expressed in the course of the discussions and that C.O.
would determine whether it would be possible to assist Subject in
obtaining a West German driverss license (Subject indicated that
he had a Congo drivers license when he arrived in Frankfurt
although it was issued in another name). While Subject pretended
to have a genuine interest in obtaining such employment-- and
used this to refute C.O.'s accusation that he only wanted to start
at the top and considered most kinds of honest employment as
being beneath him--C.O. is highly skeptical of Subject's motives.
WIROGUE was told to call Makaxxxkxkixx Mac (this is the only name
which C.O.gave to WIROGUE) on the following dây (Thursday, 1
October) and C.O. would let him know whether he could help
him obtain a West German license. WIROGUE was-quick-to-point-out
that
14-00000
S-EC-R-E-T
PECH CONTACT
DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
21 April 1964
TIME:
1130 hours
PLACE:
Kaiserstr. and
Taunus Anlage
OKT
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS
C. O. met Subject who had invited him to meet for lunch.
They had a drink together and then went to a Chineese
restaurant
At first C. O. was afraid that Subject was getting ready
to ask a favor or present a problem but it turned out that
he merely wanted to visit with C.O. whom he considers to be
his only friend, at least in Frankfurt. He said that his work
with the Munich firm is going very well and is coming along
fine. He received his arst month's salary and expects to go
to Munich on the first part of May for consultations and
would then, around 30 May, move to Munich permanently. C. O.
told Subject that he would be leaving for the U.S. probably
the first week in June and Subject asked if they could have
dinner together at least one more time before he left.
Subject said he had signed the contract, details of which
he had previously given C.O., but was sorry that he had not
brought the contract with him and promised to show it to C.O.
the next time they met. Subject thanked C. O. for all the
help he had given him to enable him to make a new start and
wanted the lunch to be a small token of his appreciation. He
also paid C.O. 20 DM which had been loaned him a year and a half
earlier and gave C.O. a small French cigarette lighter as a
rememberance. C. O. dropped Subject off downtown and suggested
they have lunch, perhaps the first or second week in May.
SECRET
61
14-00000
S-Y-C-R-S-T
PEPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
18 March 1964
TIME:
12 o'clock
PLACE:
Schultheis Restaurant
OKT
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. met Subject in response to a telephone call in
which Subject invited C. O. to lunch to help him celebrate
a new stroke of fortune. WIROGUE told C. O. that the
director of the firm in Munich (reported in previous contact.
reports) and his European sales representative had met with
Subject and discussed the possibility of his association with
the Munich firm. Subject said the following had been agreed
on:
Subject would receive 1500 Di a month salary,
free living quarters in Munich, the cost of
maintaining his apartment in Frankfurt, expense
account, percentage of the profits realized
from any of Subject's inventions patented by the
firm, a work shop in Munich plus absolute personal
freedom of movement regarding working hours, etc.
etc.
C. O. told him that the above was very hard to believe,
that he should have this in writing. Subject said that it
was to be drawn-up and sent to him for his signature.
C. O., of course, expressed his delight with Subject's
perspicacity and perspicuity and ist but not boundless
gafl. C. o. asked if this would mean he would be moving to
the-Munich area. Subject-said that this was doubtful_unless
he could find a mechanic in the Munich area who would work
as cheaply as Nagely with whom he is now associated. He
intends to spend most of his time in Munich, however, and
will come to Frankfurt once a month to oversee Nagely's work
on the production models of his projects. Subject intends to
do the research and development work in Munich with Nagely in
Frankfurt making the finished model.
14-000,00
C. O. told Subject that he should not forget he would
be required to establish a Zweiter Wohngits Subject said
e would look into this as soon as the work shop in Munich
s completed and ready for him.
Subject stated that C. O 0. was his only friend and that
he would like to call him again soon and have lunch with
him. C. O. told him he would be delighted to meet him
whenever he has time. C. O. dropped Subject off downtown
after congratulating him once again on his good fortune.
NOTE: CO. is aware that Subject is basically a lonely
man and does enjoy his company. He is also aware that
Subject is staying in frequent frequent touch because he feels he
is operating in a society to which he really does not belong
and associates himself more with with things American
14-00000
SECRET
11 March 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
On 25 February 1964 the undersigned met with Clarence
Schmidt and Art Stimpson of CCA Bonn to apprise them of the
status of the WIROGUE case. Since Clarence S. was preparing
to depart PCS, C.O.'s discussion was primarily with Art S.,
Clarence's replacement.
C. O. briefed Art on WIROGUE's background prior to
recruitment and his activities while associated with KUBARK,
C. O reviewed HARVARD's attempt to prepare Subject for
resettlement and said that we are now in a position to quit
claim him and close the case and that we wanted to bring OCA
up-to-date on the status of Subject's case and to find out if
there are any loose ends from Bonn's point of view or HARVARD's
which should be tightened up prior to cutting Subject loose.
C. O. explained that since December 12, 1962 when OCA
received a query from the BFV regarding Subject, HARVARD had
been trying to reach the point where Subject could be on his
own. C. 0. explained that we had realized that after the
original political recognition interview fiasco had brought
Subject to the attention of the BFV, that to enable Subject to
emigrate from Germany or to stay here without continuing
problems in the future would require preparing a complete life
history for Subject with a new political recognition interview
story. Both the Lebenslauf and a new interview story were
prepared and copies of the old story were removed from the
various files and replaced by the new. C. O. said that HARVARD
bad two questions for Bonn end that (1) at the time of the
original BFV interest in Subject had OCA promised Subject
be_resettled outside Germany? and (2) would-OCA know if the
BFV in Cologne had a copy of Subject's political recognition
interview story?. Art brought out OCA's file on the case and
said to answer the second question first it would appear from
the detailed information contained in the BFV query that they
SECRET
were indeed in possession of a copy of the story. He went on
to state that in answer to question (1) OCA's reply to the
BFV was that Subject, was of operational interest to AIS and
would they please suspend their investigation until til Subje ject
is no longer of interest at which time OCA A would automatically
provide the BFV with the details of Subject's case.
C. O. said that John Wilms of the 513th MI Group at
Camp King was reasonably certain that that the BFV man in Zirndorf
had only sent excerpts oft s of the Sanders political recognition
interview story to the BFV in Cologne, since so many cases of
interest to the BFV are processed each month that only the
baresoutlines of a particular case would be sent on from
Zirndorf Art and Al W. said that if the original story had
not gone to Cologne then a very detailed summary had gone.
In any event
We all agreed that unless Subject got into serious
trouble in the future no problems would arise.
we could only wait and see what might tcome up
OCA appreciated being brought up-to-date on the case
and provided HARVARD C. O. with copies of the BFV 's original
query and OCA's reply: C. O. promised to send OCA a copy
of Subject's original and of his latest political recognition
interview story and a copy of the Lebenslauf.
ORME K DARONNAT
14-00000
S-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT ON CONTACT WITH AGENT OR DEFECTOR
SUBJECT:
WIROGUE
DATE:
10 March 1964
TIME:
1500 hours
PLACE:
Oderweg & Glauburgstr.
ORME K DARONNAT Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. met Subject as a result of a telephone call
requesting C. O.'s assistance. Subject told C. O. that he
had gone to the local police revier and had tried to register
but that since he had neglected to take along a filled-out
Anmeldebestätigung signed by the landlord he had been told
to go get the form, fill it out properly and then return. The
police had looked at his derēgistration slip with the 2 March
date indicated and had told him to waste no time since an
individual is required to deregister and re-register within a
period of 8 days and it was now the 10th of March. Subject
said that since his rental contract dates from January 1 and
that date is indicated on the registration slip, the police
will question why he waited so long to register. C. O. told
him that the answer was simple and that he wished Subject would
not bother him with such small problems. C. O. told Subject
to get an Anmelda forn and fill it out and have his landlord
sign that he moved into the apartment on 1 March and explain
to the landlord that he had been deregistered as of 2 March.
Subject said that he had already figured this out but that he
wanted an excuse to meet C. O. and talk to him.
He showed C. O. a Munich Konto check for 4,000 DM which
he had received for developing a device reported in previous
contact reports and went on to say that his business trip to
Munich had been reasonably successful. He had discussed the
development of several new devices with the director of the
Munich firm and was now in the process of working on another
device for the firm. He had made arrangements whereby he would
receive no payment for the new device but that the firm would use
its sales to marke another invention of his for him.
The firm had also asked Subject if he would be willing to
come to Munich to live and work. Subject has agreed if the offer
turns out to be worth his while. C. O. congratulated Subject
and told him to continue the good work.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
3 March 1964
1130 hours
Kuhwaldstr. 51.
ORME K DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. met Subject and gave him his new Reiseausweis expiring
in 1966 and pointed out there was a restriction against going into
business for himself. He was given his Lohnsteurkarten for
'62, '63 and '64 plus his Abmeldebestätigung indicating his
deregistration from 145 Hohemarkstr to 51 Kuhwaldstr on 2 March
1964. He was told to go to the local Police Revier and register.
Subject was given a copy of his new political recognition
interview story and was asked if he had any questions regarding
his legend. Subject replied that the story was so long he
could not possibly memorize it completely. C. O. told him that
the intent was to provide in detail any and all facts which in
the future might be of importance to him in the conduct of his
affairs.
Subject was asked about his plans for the future. His
answer was that the Director of the firm (reported in contact
report 17 February 1964) had invited him to come to Munich on
3 March 1964 to discuss, among other things, the possibility of
employing Subject in the engineering department. This plus the
fact that Subject has signed an agreement with BOHLER & CO.
OPTICAL FACTORY, FF/M to act as an engineering consultant might
enable him to realize his ambition, i.e. to have a position
rather than an ordinary job.
C. O. quitclaimed Subject and wished him luck.
Subject asked that C. O. be sure to let the higher echelon
know he appreciates all_that_has_been_done-for-him.
Subject said that although official contact is at an end
he hoped that C. O. would not reject an invitation for a friendly
get together from time to time. C. O. replied that if business
matters permitted he would be glad to meet Subject.
Subject jovially announced that they would probably meet
some day in the U.S. C. O. reminded him that any action on his
part which would involve the taking of fingerprints could have
dire consequence for him. C. O. went on to report what he had
told Subject months earlier and that is:
Any attempt to immigrate to the U.S., Canada, Australia, etc.
would bring him to the attention of INTERPOL On the other
hand, he could immigrate to South America but it would be
imperative that he first learn Russian if he is to pass himself
off as a recent refugee from the Soviet Union. C. O. said he
could see no reason to prevent Subject from visiting any country
or even entering as a technical representative. C. O. told him
that he is soundly, if not perfectly,documented and that we can
do no better and that he should never forget that his fingerprints
are the weakest links.
C. O. said good-by and parted company. Case closed.
NOTE: Normally HARVARD would provide a statement on one of our
cover unit stationary letterheads covering the period of time
Subject was in our custody and indicating that he was more or
less professionally associated with the U.S. Army. Chief/HARVARD
and C. O. felt that unless Subject requests such a letter it
would be adviseable not to expose him to any more of our M.O.
We can be sure that if Subject needs such a letter he will
contact HARVARD.
* Thi of
control.
is not true bat does enable ns to exercise some
course is
24 February 1964
1130 hours
Kuhwaldstr. 51
ORME K. DARONNAT
Case Officer
COMMENTS:
C. O. dropped in to see Subject and paid him DM 800
final subsistence for March. C. O. emphasized that this
would be the last time Subject would receive any money and
that he must now arrange for a new source of income
Subject laughed and said he had the impression C. O. was
anxious to get rid of him and also seemed to have doubts
as to his ability to take care of his financial problems.
C. O. laughed in turn and said he would indeed be glad to see
Subject on his own and added that he had no doubts re:
Subject's ability to get money but that he is only hoping Subject
would use methods acceptable to society (chuckle).
Since Subject had both English and German versions of his
legend, C. 0. took the English copy with the explanation that
if Subject should submit a Lebenslauf, in connection with a
job application, the German version would be more appropriate.
C. O. took Subject to lunch and dropped him off in the
city after promising to see him on the 2nd of March.
SECRET
C.O. picked uf Suljects Reviansweis
be returned to the authorities and
and told him it would
a new one
would be
issued. This would eliminate the need for a renewal
until 1966.
SECRET
Excluded from a
Congoing and
declassification
24 February 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: WIROGUE
1. С.О. and Sam Markowtiz met with John Wilms, Special
Liaison Advisor to the 513th MI Group at Camp King, to discuss
certain problems connected with the WIROGUE case. CO. told
John that we are going to attempt to make a clean in brake with
Subject this coming Friday but there were a few loose ends which
had to be cleared up before we could take this final step.
C. O. said that in reviewing the new political recognition
interview story, we had noted that the new story did not
incorporate the name change of Subject's father from Simon
Sanders to Frank Simon Sanders. C. O. asked if the new copy
would have to be changed or replaced. John made a note of what
the change of name should really be and told C. O have all
the new copies changed to read Frank Simon Sanders. John said
that this sort of thing happens from time to time; that it is
just a simple error and will raise no eyebrows.
2. C. 0. then brought up the point that Subject's
Reiseausweis will expire in October 1964 and we and Subject were
wondering if subiekt would run into any problem when he went
to the Polizei Presidum to get a Reiseausweis rencwal. John
said that there would be no problems that he could see: but to
make sure that there is no slip-up, we should pick up Subject's
current Reiseausveis and if Sam prepares the necessary Antrag,
John will get us a new Reiseausweis within one or two days, dated
with a current date. C. O. said he would pick up Subject's
Reiseausweis and give it to Sam this week and Sam will prepare
the necessary papers for a new Reiseausweis, plus a 1964
Lohnsteurkarte and a deregistration slip. If this works out,
our plans to
Friday.
with Subject will be accomplished this coming
brought us
3. C. O. then pointed out the BFV's interest in Subject
in late 1962 and mentioned to John we had received a query from
Bonn indicating the BFV's interest in Subject, and contained
what looked like excerpts from Subject's political recognition
SECRET
interview story. C. O. went on to say that we were wondering
if a copy of the story might have gone to the BFV in Bonn, and
that Wilms had missed one of the old copies when he recalled
all copies recently and replaced them with the new story. John
said that Camp Zirndorf processes 50 to 100 cases a month, one
half of which are interest in one way or another to the BFV.
He said that what had gone to Bonn was very likely an excerpt,
that the entire story would not have been sent to Bonn. John
went on to say that with the new copy in the file, if this
excerpt should come to light in the future, a check would merely
indicate that someone had made a mistake and the matter would be
dropped. John added that he knows we are concerned about this
case, but that he sees no reason why there should be any trouble
of any kind. He said that the only problem will be if Subject
himself comes to the attention of the authorities because of
some shinanigans on his part.
Orme B. Daronnat
SECRET
-2-
