1000000
104-10400-10316
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
SECURITY
FOR COMMITTEES
11 March 1977
Kem, please
make copy
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Mr. James M. Potts
Chief, Africa Division
Mr. Richard S. Sampson
Chief, Europe Division
Mr. Alan D. Wolfe
Chief, Near East Division
Mr. Richard F. Stolz
Chief, Soviet/East European Division
FROM
:
John D. Walker
O/SA/DO/0
SUBJECT
:
Guidelines for Providing Information
to the House Appropriations Committee
Surveys and Investigations Staff
Concerning Foreign Intelligence and
Security Services
1. Since members of the S&I Staff will be
talking with your Divisions in the near future,
it may be worthwhile to review the guidelines as
to what may be said concerning relationships with
foreign liaison services. In the broad sense,
liaison services constitute both a source and a
method.
2.
We are prepared to discuss the following:
a. The identification and responsibili-
ties of the liaison services in a particular
area to the extent that we can draw on
sources other than information derived through
the established liaison relationship, i.e.
overt information or information from penetra-
tions which will not endanger the source.
b. In further describing the liaison
services, we can provide information on the.
objectives, key personnel, strength, budget
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 012860
SECRET
13-00000-
1
SECRET
and methods of operations of services provided
that such data will be drawn from open sources
or penetrations and not from details of liaison
arrangements with the services themselves.
c.
Agency manhours and funds devoted to
liaison with the foreign services.
d. In the case of SIGINT liaison, further
details on such arrangements, including the
scope of funds and equipment provided to such
foreign services.
d. We are prepared to provide general
comments on the degree of operational coopera-
tion with the Station. If technical support,
for example, provides a useful input, we can
state that the liaison service provides
technical support, using a qualifying adjective
to define, such as excellent, limited, etc.
3.
We have no objection to the provision of
foreign intelligence reports based on liaison with
such services. Source descriptions should be those
used in the disseminated report.
4. We will not make available details on
liaison arrangements, information on sources and
methods of such services which have been obtained
through liaison or jointly controlled sources or
other information which would reveal Agency sources
and methods or violate the trust on which the
official liaison relationship is based.
5. The S&I Staff approves close liaison
relationships and believes that these relationships
are cost effective.
O/SA/DO/O:JDWalker:kaw
Distribution
Original C/AF
1
C/EUR
1
C/NE
1
C/SE
2
SA/DO/0
SECRET
John D. Walker
(1542)
13-00000
Guidelines for Providing Information
to Congressional Oversight Committees on
Foreign Intelligence and Security Services
These guidelines take into account the fact that
foreign intelligence and security services, when acting
in connection with the Agency's official liaison with
them, constitute both a source and a method and thus
require the statutory protection accorded any other
intelligence source or method. The guidelines also
recognize that the duly constituted oversight bodies of
the Congress have expressed an interest in such services
and in the general scope, nature and extent of the Agency's
relationships with them. The purpose of these guidelines
is to provide a formula for dealing with these two
sometimes conflicting objectives.
The Agency is prepared to provide, upon specific
request, appropriately classified and sanitized information
to oversight committees on the following aspects of
foreign intelligence and security services:
a. The identification of the governments with
whose services CIA has liaison arrangements;
b.
Agency man hours and funds devoted to
liaison with foreign services;.
c.
In the case of SIGINT liaison, further
details on such arrangements, including the scope of
SECRET
13-00000
funds and equipment provided to such foreign services;
d. Information on the objectives, key personnel,
strength, budget and methods of operation of such services,
provided that such data will be drawn from open sources or
penetrations and not from the details of liaison
arrangements with the services themselves;
e. Where relevant, foreign intelligence reports
based on liaison with such services.
The Agency will not make available to the oversight
committees the details of liaison arrangements with
foreign services, information on sources and methods of..
such services obtained through liaison or jointly
controlled sources, or other information which would
reveal Agency sources or methods or violate the trust on
which these official liaison relationships is necessarily
based.
In the event of substantial allegations of improper
activities conducted by foreign intelligence or security
services with which the Agency is presumed to maintain
liaison, every effort will be made to provide all relevant
facts which bear on such allegations. Where this would
involve departure from the above guidelines, the Director
will be prepared to meet with the Chairman or Vice-Chairman
of the committee to seek a satisfactory resolution of such
problems.
SECRET
13-00000
HSC MAT FUR
REVIEW STAFF
75-20
24 July 1975
SECURITY
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
Mr. Colby, Mitch Rogovin and Mr. Knoche met with
Chairman Otis Pike at 9:30, 7/24 in Chairman Pike's office
to discuss groundrules, etc. for the House Select Committee
on Intelligence.
Mr. Colby left the following material with Pike:
1. 16 June 1975 Letter to the Honorable Elmer B. Staats
Comptroller General of the United States, Signed by
Mr. Colby. The letter deals with the GAO's audit
of the Central Intelligence Agency. (Attached).
2. Guide to Central Intelligence Agency Statutes and Law
dated September 1970 (without the Ryan Amendment
on Foreign Intelligence). (Filed in 6D0120)
3. Three Groudrules papers: (Attached)
--Agreements To Be Sought By the DCI With Chairmen
of the Select Committees
--Secrecy Agreement
--Guides for Protection of Classified Information
And Documents Furnished The Select Committee
4. 11 March 1975 Letter from Colby to Senator Church.
(Attached)
Rosemarie R. Hesterberg
13-00000
SECRET
Checklist for DCI Discussion with HSC
1.
Your intent to be cooperative and forthcoming.
2.
Your responsibility to protect S&M. Will need HSC understanding
of particularly sensitive matters:
--names of agents and sources..
:
--names of cooperating American organizations and
contacts to whom we have pledged confidentiality.
--material from foreign liaison.
--sensitive intelligence methods and techniques of collection.
3. Will need to work out security groundrules.
4.
5.
--Chairman of USIB Security Committee and CIA Director
of Security available to help work out custodial arrangements,
compartmented clearances, etc.
Importance of secrecy agreements. Your willingness to suspend
them to permit testimony by current and ex-employees.
Will confirm with a letter and an employee bulletin which
can be used by HSC in dealing with Agency witnesses and
interviews.
??
24 July 1975
SECRET
Classified by
014359
Exempt from general
declassification schedule of E.O. 11652
exemption schedule 5B (1), (2), (3)
Automatically declassified on
Date Impossible to Determine
13-00000
AGREEMENTS TO BE SOUGHT BY THE DCI WITH
CHAIR MEN OF THE SELECT COMMITTEES
1. It would be desirable if the DCI could secure agreement
with the Chairmen of the Select Committees, as has been customary
in other Congressional proceedings regarding sensitive matters, that:
(a) Departments and agencies shall have the right
to request that testimony be given only in executive session,
that in some instances testimony be "off-the-record" and
that certain testimony be heard only by members and in
some cases only by the Chairman and Vice Chairman..
(b) Witnesses be afforded an opportunity to review
and comment on and/or correct the record of their testimony.
prior to any publication of it.
(c) When questioned about intelligence matters that
come under the purview of another organization, witnesses
should be permitted to state that a response to the question
is not properly within their authority and to respectfully
suggest that the appropriate party be called to testify on
such matters.
2. It would also be desirable if the DCI could secure agreement
with the Chairmen of the Select Committees that those agencies
furnishing documents to the committees be authorized to excise from
those documents, prior to presentation, the names of their personnel
under cover or whose personal safety might be jeopardized as well as
those of other individuals whose safety or individual privacy may be
jeopardized by disclosuře. Also excised should be names of sources,
operations. specific details of technical devices and systems main-
tained in compartmented channels and names of organizations
cooperating on a highly confidential basis.
3. In view of their susceptibility to foreign countermeasures,
it would be desirable if the DCI could obtain agreement with the
Chairmen of the Select Committees not to require presentation of details
13-00000
of the technology of the technical collection programs. It would also
be desirable if the Select Committees adopted. the use of Compart-
mented Control Systems to protect documents on these programs
and cleared only those staff personnel with an absolute need-to-know.
The responsible departments and agencies would be glad to advise
and assist in any arrangements the Chairmen would desire in this
compartmented area.
4. Further, it would be desirable if the DCI attempt to
secure an agreement with the Chairmen of the Select Committees
that they will entertain and consider security principles and guide-
lines which will be provided.
2
13-00000
SECRECY AGREEMENT
I,
in accepting employment
or assignment with the Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, recognize the
special trust and confidence placed in me to protect classified infor-
mation from unauthorized disclosure.
I hereby agree to accept the specific obligations set forth
below as a condition precedent of my employment or assignment with
the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect
to Intelligence Activities, established by the Senate of the United
States, Resolution 21, agreed to on January 27, 1975, hereinafter
referred to as the Select Committee.
It is my understanding that in the course of my employment
or assignment with the Select.Committee I will be given access to
information from departments and agencies of the Government which
is classified in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive
Order 11652 of March 8, 1972, as amended. All classified information
so acquired by me in the course of my employment remains the
property of the United States of America and I further agree to
surrender upon demand by the Chairman of the Select Committee
or his designee(s) or upon my separation from the Select Committee,
any classified material which has come into my possession as a
result of my employment or assignment with the Select Committee.
I hereby agree that the burden is on me to determine if
information is classified and that I will never divulge, publish or
reveal by word, writing, conduct or otherwise any classified
information which has come to my knowledge as a result of my
employment or assignment with the Select Committee without prior
written consent of the Chairman or the President of the Senate or
their duly authorized representative.
13-00000
I hereby agree that any information learned during my
employment or assignment with the Select Committee which is related
to intelligence and prepared for publication by me will be submitted to
the Chairman or the President of the Senate or their duly authorized
representative prior to discussing with or showing to any publisher,
editor or literary agent for the purpose of determining whether said
material contains any classified information as defined in Executive
Order 11652. I agree that the Chairman of the Select Committee,
President of the Senate or their duly authorized representative has
the authority to make the final determination as to whether information
is classified and thus should be deleted from the material submitted.
I have been informed of the provisions of 18 U.S. C. 793, 794,
798 and 952; and 50 US.C. 783 (b); and 42 U.S.C. 2274; and Executive
Order 11652, all of which relate to the protection of classified infor--
mation, and understand their meaning.
Further, I agree to abide by such rules and procedures as the
Select Committee shall institute for the protection of classified material.
I understand that any breach of any part of the obligations in this agree-
ment could subject me to legal and/or administrative action.
I further agree that all the conditions and obligations imposed
on me with respect to the protection of classified information by this
agreement and applicable security regulations apply during my employ-
ment or assignment and continue after that relationship has terminated.
I take the obligations set forth above freely and without any
mental reservations or purpose of evasion.
Signature
Date
WITNESS:
Signature
Date
13-00000
GUIDES FOR PROTECTION OF CLASSIFIED INFORMATION
AND DOCUMENTS FURNISHED THE SELECT COMMITTEES
1. Personnel Security Clearances
(a) Background Investigation
It would be desirable for the Select Committees to stipulate
that no staff personnel is to be given access to any classified material,
testimony or information received or generated by the committees.
without prior receipt of a security clearance based on a full field
investigation.
(b) Secrecy Agreement
It would be desirable for the Select Committees to require a
signed secrecy agreement of employees or individuals assigned to
the committees' staffs. The agreement should include provisions:
1) That acceptance of committee secrecy regulations
is a condition precedent of employment or assignment;
2) Recognizing US Government property rights to
classified information;
3) Requiring prior written consent before divulgence
of classified information;
4) For recognition that breach of the secrecy rules
and obligations contained in the agreement could subject
the signer to administrative and/or legal action under
appropriate statutes;
5) That there is no time limit on the terms of the
agreement.
13-00000
2. Physical and Document Security
The Select Committees should adopt rules to insure that the
secrecy of any sensitive information received or generated by it be
preserved. These rules should be made known to the individuals
and agencies who will be called upon to present testimony or
materials. Among these should be rules on physical security and
document security...
(a) Physical Security
It would be desirable if the Select Committees adopt the following
rules related to physical security:
1) All classified material will be stored in safes for
safekeeping in the registry of the Joint Committee on Atomic
Energy or similar facility and handled in accordance with
the regulations of this registry for classified material.
2). Twenty-four-hour guard protection, supplemented
by anti-intrusion alarms, should be required on the storage
area.
3) Areas selected for use in closed session should
be guarded against entry by unauthorized persons.
4) The committees should arrange for the conduct of
audio countermeasures to preclude the possibility of
unauthorized use of transmitters and/or recording devices.
It should be noted that a foreign clandestine transmitter was
located in the Rayburn House Office Building on 12 February
1973.
5) At the end of each session of the Select Committees,
the hearing room should be examined by a cleared staff
officer who will secure any misplaced classified material
or waste..
2
13-00000
6) Areas should be designated in which classified
material can be reviewed. These arcas should be secure
against access by unauthorized personnel. Material should
not be removed from these areas for the sake of convenience
except when necessary for the work of the committees and
should not be transported overnight to the office or residence
of personnel of the committees.
(b) Document Security
1) Committees should select and identify a single
location and specific personnel authorized to sign acknow-
ledgement of receipt of classified materials provided to
the committees.
2) A system of document control should be established
to permit control of classified documents to provide for
accountability.
3) Duplication of documents should be controlled so
as to require a record of the document reproduced, the
number of copies reproduced and the custodian or receiving
personnel. Reproduced classified documents should be
subject to the same controls as the original.
4) Appropriate arrangements should be made for
the destruction of classified waste.
5) Transcripts. The committees should give
consideration to the necessity of providing appropriate
security in the transcription of testimony by committee
transcribers. The committees may desire to charge each
agency presenting testimony with this responsibility. In
some, if not all cases, this might include escort of
materials to the place of transcription, the securing of
carbons, waste and notes and the return of the transcribed
testimony to the committee for safekeeping in accordance
with cominittce rules.
3
13-00000
6) Early agreement should be reached on the
disposition of classified materials such as storage
under seal in the National Archives. The question of
access should be determined by the President of the
Senate or the Speaker of the House.
3. Compartmented Information
There is some extremely sensitive information in the intelligence
community which is disseminated only to those who have a very strict
"need to know!" in order to build, perfect, operate or handle the
material produced by extremely sensitive foreign-intelligence collection
programs.. The sensitivity of these programs rests upon the vulner-
ability to countermeasures which a foreign government could easily
institute. if.details of the means of collection became known. Thus,
even individuals cleared for Top Secret information do not have access
to compartmented information unless they are required to have such
knowledge in the performance of their duties. This information is
handled in Compartmented Control Systems. It would be desirable
if the Chairmen would adopt the Compartmented Control Systems on
these extremely sensitive collection efforts and clear only those
staff personnel with an absolute "need to know" about such systems,
and that documents related to such systems be handled in a compart-
mented fashion by the Select Committee. The responsible departments
and agencies would be glad to advise and assist in any arrangements
the Chairmen would desire in this compartmented area.
4. Security Officer
It would be desirable if the committees appointed a security
officer with the responsibility of discharging the security rules adopted
by the committee and of serving as a point of contact with the depart-
ments and agencies of interest to the committee. It would also be
desirable if the committee rules required each agency of interest to
identify a single point of contact to facilitate provisions of security
support required by the committee.
13-00000
ENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEN
MASHINGTON, D.C. 20505
1.6 JUN 1975
Žrecutive Fuglary
75-228914
Honorable Elmer B. Staats
Comptroller General of the United States
General Accounting Office
441 G Street
Washington, D. C. 20548
Dear Mr. Staats:
My attention has been directed to a letter from Mr. Keller, General
Accounting Office, to the Honorable William Proxmire dated May 10, 1974,
which was placed in the Congressional Record by Senator Proxmire on
February 11, 1975. The letter deals with the intelligence community and
reviews the General Accounting Office's right to audit and obtain information
from the Central Intelligence Agency.
Inasmuch as Mr. Keller has treated a subject basic to this Agency's
capability to carry out work mandated by Congress, I believe it would serve
a useful purpose to review some of the background concerning the use of
confidential funds and their relationship to the audit of CIA over the years.
Mr. Keller notes in his letter that there are "a fairly substantial number
of instances where expenditures are accounted for solely upon a certification.
by the head of the department or establishment involved." The need is clear
in the case of this Agency. The necessity to safeguard certain truly vital
foreign intelligence secrets has been recognized by the Congress in its
direction to the Director of Central Intelligence to protect intelligence sources
and methods from unauthorized disclosure. This responsibility was complemented
by authorizing certain expenditures "for objects of a confidential, extraordinary,
or emergency nature, to be accounted for solely on the certificate of the Director
of Central Intelligence. Such expenditures would apply, for example, to a
secret agent operating abroad in a hostile climate whose identity must be pro-.
tected not only so that he can continue supplying the intelligence involved, but
also because his freedom--and on occasion his life--weighs in the balance.
Other intelligence activities do not have such obvious security require-
ments, but are, nonetheless, within the sources and methods concept. Liaison
with foreign intelligence and security agencies is extremely important in fields of
both positive intelligence and counterintelligence. Such liaisons to be effective
depend on the confidence of each service that the other will protect not only the
mere fact of the relationships, but also its sources and methods and sensitive
information. Compromise of any of these brings not only protests from the foreign
liaison service, but in some cases a lessening or even cessation of its cooperation.
13-00000
Even overt activities have their own security problems. Thus, many U. S.
citizens and others are willing to provide sensitive information to overt intelligence
units only on condition that their cooperation in this respect be absolutely protected.
This need for the special protection of intelligence sources and methods has
been well recognized by officials in the executive, judicial, and legislative
branches of our Government. Mr. Lindsay C. Warren, then Comptroller General
of the United States, in a letter dated March 12, 1948, to the Director, Bureau of
the Budget, addressed the provision granting the Director of Central Intelligence
the power to certify the expenditure of confidential funds by stating that while it
provided "for the granting of much wider authority than I would ordinarily
recommend for Government agencies, generally, the purposes sought to be
obtained in the establishment of the Central Intelligence Agency are believed to
be of such paramount importance as to justify the extraordinary measures pro-
posed therein." He went on to say that the "necessity for secrecy in such matters
is apparent and the Congress apparently recognized this fully in that it provided
in section. 102(d) (3) of Public Law 253, that the Director of Central Intelligence
shall be responsible for protecting intelligence sources and methods from
unauthorized disclosure." Under these conditions, he stated, "I do not feel
called upon to object to the proposals advanced....
It has been and it remains the policy of CIA to rely upon vouchered funds
wherever possible. (Vouchered funds are those which can be accounted for and
audited in conformance with the laws that apply to other Government agencies
and with standard Government regulations and procedures.) Currently more
than half of the Agency's appropriations are disbursed as vouchered funds.
The confidential funds certification authority referred to by Mr. Warren in his
March 12, 1948 letter is reserved for "objects of a confidential, extraordinary,
or emergency nature."
From the beginning of CIA records for all vouchered fund expenditures
were made available to and were subject to a voucher audit by the GAO. Use of
the voucher audit procedure allowed the GAO to examine expenditure and
collection vouchers and related documents to determine whether expenditures
were made'legally and solely for the objects for which appropriations were made.
Use of the voucher audit procedure also allowed CIA to protect those activities of
a confidential, extraordinary, or emergency nature, i.e., intelligence sources
and methods.
Subsequent to the enactment of the CIA legislation, GAO adopted a
"comprehensive audit approach," and raised with the CIA Subcommittee of the
House Armed Services Committee the desirability of an expanded audit of Agency
activities. The Comptroller General stated by letter dated May 29, 1959 to
Subcommittee Chairman Kilday that he did "not recommend any change in section 10
(now section 8) of the Central Intelligence Act" and that "any broadening of our
audit activities should not include an evaluation of the intelligence activities of
the Agency."
2
13-00000
Mr. Allen Dulles, the Director of Central Intelligenc agreed that GAO
should expand its current audit activities in a letter to the Comptroller dated
October 16, 1959, cautioning, however, that the comprehensive audit would have
to be limited so as to remain outside the area of sensitive security operations for
which by law the Director's certificate must be deemed a sufficient voucher.
The results of the trial period of comprehensive audit from 1959 to 1961
were made.known to the CIA Subcommittee in a letter of May 16, 1961 from the
Comptroller General in which he said the GAO planned to discontinue the audit
of CIA activities. He acknowledged that various steps were taken by the CIA "to
place the General Accounting Office in a position to make a comprehensive audit
of the overt activities of CIA." Nevertheless, he stated that GAO "cannot effectively
review and evaluate activities of the Support Component because the confidential
and overt activities of this component are integrated to such an extent that we
cannot make reasonably comprehensive audits." He further stated "we have been.
given sufficient access to make reasonably comprehensive reviews of the overt
activities of the Intelligence Component, but such reviews, in our opinion, will not
be productive of significant evaluations because we cannot feasibly evaluate the
extent to which needed overt information is available for collection or determine
the need for the intelligence information selected for collation and use in the pro-
duction of intelligence reports." In short, the Comptroller General was recognizing
the conflict between the philosophy underlying a "comprehensive audit approach"
and the Director's statutory responsibility and authority to protect intelligence
sources and methods.
Both the Director and Chairman Vinson, of the House Committee on Armed
Services, requested that the Comptroller General continue to audit Agency affairs
on a limited basis, but after another trial period the Comptroller General reiterated
his earlier view. In a letter to Chairman Vinson dated June 21, 1962, the Comptroller
General stated his belief that for maximum effectiveness "it would be necessary
for our GAO audit staff to have nearly complete access to CIA activities," and
that even to perform reasonably comprehensive reviews would require "complete
access to the administrative activities that are performed in support of both
sensitive and nonsensitive operations of CIA."
Chairman Vinson replied to the Comptroller General on July 18, 1962,
stating that, "the restrictions you met within the Central Intelligence Agency
are necessary, I believe, for the proper protection of its intelligence activities
and should be maintained." The Chairman agreed, however, that in view of
the Comptroller General's opinion that a continued audit was not a worthwhile
effort, GAO might withdraw from further audit activities in the Central Intelligence
Agency...
In summary, I believe that several points are deserving of emphasis in
assessing the nature and history of GAO's audit activities with respect to this
Agency:
3
13-00000
(a) CIA coopered fully in all respects in exten Ag
administrative support and in granting security clearances
and access to information related to vouchered fund activities.
(b) The Chairman of the interested oversight committce
in the House of Representatives was fully informed of the nature
and status of the activity.
(c) This Agency encouraged GAO to conduct and to
continue to conduct its activities consistent with the operational
and statutory requirements imposed upon this Agency.
(d) The decision to discontinue the audit activities
was made solely by GAO and was approved by the Chairman
of the House Armed Services Committee.
Distribution:
Orig - Addressee
1- DCI
-DDCI
1-ER
1-OGC
Sincerely,
Colby
W. E. Colby
Director
1- DDA
1- Compt
1-OF
1-OS.
1-OLC Subject (GAO)...w/basic:
1-OLC Proxmire file
1-OLC Chrono
OLC: WPY:cg (13 Jun 75)
ER
ER
JUN 17 11 09 Ad '75
13-00000
75-3465
Det
REVIEW STAFF
75-2051
28 JUL 1975
HSC Mat Je
The Honorable Otis G. Pike, Chairman
Select Committee on Intelligence
House of Representatives
Washington, D. C. 20515
Dear Mr. Chairman:
Security
In our conversation on Friday you asked for the statutory
basis for the compartmentation principle. I wish first to
respond to your inquiry and then suggest a manner in which your
staff can receive access to the sensitive material protected
by special compartmentation systems.
The current basis for the U.S. Government security
classification system is Executive Order 11652, promulgated
on 8 March 1972. Historically, foreign intelligence.has
been treated as one category of classified national security
information. There are numerous statutory recognitions of
the importance of national security information, e.g., the
Freedom of Information Act. Consequently, much foreign
intelligence is classified CONFIDENTIAL, SECRFT or TOP
SECRET according to specifications set forth in the Order. :
Not all foreign intelligence, however, is classified national
security information under the provisions of the Executive
Order (e.g., an American source providing foreign information
or assistance). Also, the potential risks attendant with
the compromise of a foreign intelligence source or method
differ substantially from the risks attendant with much
classified defense information.
Section 102(d) (3) of the National Security Secur Act of 1947,
as amended, provides: des: "That the Director of Central Intel-
ligence shall be responsible for protecting intelligence
sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure:"
recognition of this responsibility, National Security
Council Intelligence Directive No. 1 (17 February 1972)
instructs the Director of Central Intelligence to,
"...develop and review security standards and practices as
they relate to the protection of intelligence and of
intelligence sources and methods from unauthorized disclosure."
13-00000
-2-
Since the National Security Act did not provide for an authority
corresponding with the DCI's responsibility in this area,
the Directive provides that the Members of the U.S. Intelligence
Board are responsible for: "The supervision of the dissemination
and security of intelligence material." The Director of Central
Intelligence, acting with the advice of the U.S. Intelligence
Board, has promulgated a number of directives, regulations
and security manuals, related to the protection of foreign
intelligence and foreign intelligence sources and methods,
and applicable to the overall U.S. intelligence community.
The fundamental security principle involved in the pro-
tection of foreign intelligence and of its sources and methods
is a strict application of "ne "need to know" --a principle
referred to in Executive Order 11652, Section 6(A). This
applies the simple mathematical premise that the fewer the
number of individuals made privy to a secret, the less likely
that it will be disclosed. The security principle of
"compartmentation" involving special access and information
dissemination controls is designed to ensure that only those
individuals whose "need to know" has been specifically
approved by some higher authority, who have been specially
indoctrinated, and who undertake special commitments to
protect it are provided access to a particularly sensitive
category of foreign intelligence sources and methods.
Compartmentation assists in the application of the "need-to-
know" principle by ensuring that individuals are provided
access to only that information clearly essential to the
performance of their duties.
Compartmentation was undoubtedly a major contributing
factor involved in the nation's secret development of the
atomic bomb during World War II, and the principle is still
implicit in security procedures related to ERDA's "RESTRICTED
DATA" as reflected in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954. In the
field of U.S. foreign intelligence activities, compartmentation
was practiced throughout the development and operation of the
U-2 reconnaissance program. One of the major foreign
intelligence categories of activities using formalized com-
partmentation procedures today involves the matter of
foreign signals intercept for intelligence purposes, i.e.,
communications intelligence. Title 18 of the U.S. Code
Section 798 recognizes the special character of this.
material by providing specifically for prosecution for the
unauthorized disclosure of information concerning any
communications activities of the United States without the
13-00000
-3-
necessity to show intent to harm the United States. The
reason for the application of strict compartmentation pro-
cedures to communications intelligence and other foreign
intelligence activities reflects the extreme vulnerability
of the sources. Once an opposition becomes aware of which
of its communications we are intercepting, it can take swift
remedial action, and the source can be forever lost..
On Friday afternoon, copies of the secrecy oath used
by the executive branch with respect to three compartmented
access control systems were made available to you along with
the revised forms developed for and executed by certain members
of the staff of the Senate Select Committee to Study Intelligence
Activities. I would hope that the enclosed agreement modified
for the House Select Committee, combining all three
compartments into one document, would meet your particular
concerns.
For your information, in addition to the Senate Select
Committee's use of the modified secrecy oath dealing with
compartmented access, the following House and Senate committees
have obtained compartmented access for their staffs, which
was granted after the normal briefings and signing of the
secrecy oati:
Armed Services Committee
Appropriations Committee
Aeronautical and Space Sciences Committee
May I reiterate the points I made on Friday:
a.
No material is being withheld from members of
the Committee.
b. We are prepared to and did brief the staff of the
Committee on noncompartmented matters, based upon your
certification of their security clearance and the fact
that they entered into an appropriate secrecy agreement
with you, a copy of which you provided.
c. The compartmentation procedures of the
Intelligence Community have been established pursuant
to statute and National Security Council Intelligence
Directives. The simplest way for the staff to obtain
access to this compartmented material would be to
accept the normal secrecy arrangements as modified
in the enclosed. This would ensure against difficulties
in access to such compartmented material throughout the
13-00000
-4-
Intelligence Community It is clear that the
obligations assumed here would run between the staff
member and the Committee and in no way would provide
any control or influence over them by me or any
element of the Intelligence Community.
d. It would undoubtedly be feasible to develop
another procedure to ensure special protection of the
sensitive matters currently included in the compart-
mented systems, but this would involve review and
discussions with various interested parties which
would undoubtedly take some time and delay your
investigations....
I hope you will agree that this is the simplest and..
easiest manner of solving a practical matter so that we can
proceed with the substance of your investigations.
Sincerely,..
WE Gl
W. E. Colby
13-00000
Distribution:
1-DCI
1-DDCI
1-IG
1-OLC
1-E.H.Knocke
1-SC/DCİ
White House Distribution:
1-Rod Hills
1-Phil Buchen
1-Jay French
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
COMPARTMENTED INTELLIGENCE INDOCTRINATION
I have been informed that pursuant to law (Sections 792,
793, 794, 795, 797 and 798 of Title 18, United States Code) I
am not to discuss with or disclose to any person any information
relating directly or indirectly to the below identified compart-
mented Programs, unless such person is currently authorized to
discuss or receive such information or material of the particular
category involved. I am aware that the responsibility of
ascertaining that such an authorization for another person is
valid and current, rests with me.
I acknowledge that it is my responsibility to inform
myself of the contents of the above mentioned sections of
Title 18, U.S. Code, as they pertain to performance of my
duties. I am aware further that if a change in my status
renders it no longer necessary for me