104-10226-10011
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
19-120-26
UR
6 April 1961
Chief, Counterintelligence Division
ATTN: Support
Chief, Miami Office
Memorandum of Visit to Julio Pablo RODRIGUEZ MORENO
3339 N.W. 7th Avenue
Miami, Florida
1. Mr. Frank Waterman, representative of the US State Dept., in Miami,
advised this office that subject arrived in the US on 2 April 61, en route
to Chicago, Illinois. Subject's passport disclosed that he was born on
25 Oct 1943 in Havana, Cuba.
2. On 4 April 61, Lt. Col. J. Rodrigues interviewed subject in Miami's
office. Subject's statement of his passport disclosed that he was born on
25 Oct 1943 in Havana, Cuba.
3. Subject stated that he is a member of a clandestine organization
United Revolutionary Military Organization in Cuba (URM), which is composed of 26
coordinated military operations. The leaders of URM are: Major Humberto
ORTIZ, who was arrested recently; Angel Gonzalez, who was known as "El
Tigre"; and Rafael DIAZ "Palp". All
these individuals were arrested recently and are completely disorganized as
a result.
4. Subject also stated that his sister with Mr. was to serve as courier
between the organization and the Catholic Chaplain at the Cuban fortress.
The liaison between the Chaplain and Subject was through the services of
the Jesuits at the Jesuit Church in the outskirts of Havana, Cuba.
5. Subject also made a trip to Sancti Spiritus in the Province of Las
Villas bringing a radio transmitter for the anti-Castro guerrillas operating
in the Escambray. Through the above mentioned priests, subject obtained some
information furnished by prisoners held in the Cabana fortress which is being
translated to paragraph.
6. Subject intends to reside in the US indefinitely and has been instructed
to contact a Cuban national presently in the US, residing at
Miami. Barroto is the representative in Miami.
7. No further contacts with Subject are anticipated.
JUNIO F. GUERRERO
(re distribution)
by Applicant