14-00000
104-10173-10134
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
HOUSE SELECT COTHILL ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF M.S
FILE TITLE/NIPIRER/VOLILNE: ISAACS, HACID.
201-18446
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY: THIRD AGENCY DOCUMENTS
DATE
DATE
RECEIVED FRUTURNED
10:A
SANG28
AACS HAROLD
SIGNATURE OF
REVIEWING OFFICIAL
REVIEWED BY
(PRINT NAME)
BETSY WOLE
Betay Hilf
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE.
LE
トロコ
IS IN CHRONOLOGICAL ORDE
MATERIAL FILED IN THIS FOLDE
1
201 No.18446
1400000
C-O-N-F-FORE-T-I-A-L
When Pired In
(date)
:
Review of 201 File on U.S. Citizen
-
In accordance with the DDO's notice of 9 December 1974,
I have reviewed the 201 file on ISAACS
(201 number indicated below), and
most accurately be categorized as indicated below:
have determined that it can
(surname)
should be closed.
witting collaborator.
OI Code Al.
:
potential witting collaborator; date opened
OI Code A2.
former witting collaborator (relationship terminated).
OI. Code A3.
potential witting collaborator never contacted (security
reasons, derogatory information). OI Code A4.
counterintelligence case (i.e., involving a foreign
intelligence or security service). OI Code A5...
all others. ΟΙ Code A6.
Signed Balkan Beeth
(name)
CH/FCCI
(title)
(component)
This assignment of category has been entered into STAR.
Signed
KAM
(initials),
(date)
This document is a permanent part of this file.
SECRET
When coop In
C-O-N-F-1-0-1-A-L
241
AN
197
201-18476
E2 IMPDET
CL BY
054979
14-00000
SECRET
4 October 1974
ΧΑΑΖ-35686
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
0
SUBJECT: Former Records of Ray Murphy
1. The attached documents are part of a large
collection of records held by Ray Murphy during his
tenure as an official of the Department of State.
He transferred all of his records to CIA upon his
retirement in the mid-1960's. The documents of that
collection which did not meet the retention criteria
of the DDO or the Office of Security were destroyed.
While those which were of utility have been retained
and accessioned as appropriate to the DDO records
system.
2. The attached records concern
Harold ISAACS
who is the subject of 201-0018446
be classified to that file.
:
and should
:
Attachment
M. Gaiel Hartman
M. Paul Hartman
C/CIRA/RS
PIN
P
of att H/W
RECORD COPY
SECRET
4.Oct 74
201-18446
E2. IMPDET
CL BY 006593
14-00000
Copy: ARISS
CBD:
SOURCE: NET FASSES, New York City,
Cotober 22, 1936 - Page 12
EUROPE'S CRISIS; JAPAN PRAPARES
By Bensu Chan
There are numerous American journalists of
different political color and shades of opinion who are
"cooperating" in this way with Japanese imperialion, but
whoever has followed the writings of Harold Isaaca,
Alexander Buchman, Frank Class and Wilbur Burton in The
China Press, The China Weekly Review, Asia, Pacific Affairs,
New International, etc., realizes that these American
Trotskyist journalists are the most vicious and most dan
gerous of the whole lot of reactionery journalists.
Hiding behind a barrage of Marxist parasoology (which
noue of them has yet learned to manipulate with facility),
those people are energetically conducting a campaign of
lice against the Communist International, the Chinese
Communist Party, the Soviet Union, the Chinese Soviets
and the Chinese Red Army, a campaign which aims to under-
mine the confidence of the outside world in the Chinese
Soviet movement and the Red Army,
:
RECORD COPY
Harold Sonnes
201-18446.
H/W ATT CI To XAAZ-35786
201-15446
14-00000
SUR COLEIUNISI ACTIVITIES FILES
Oct 23.1957
Date
SOURCE:
File No.
DAILY WORKER
9100 se
X 4202 China.
TROTZKYITE BOOK MOURNS
OVER CHINESE REVOLUTION
THE TRAGEDY OF THE CIII of devious Trotskyite..
NESE REVOLUTION. By Isaacs book, has been reissued,
polemics,
Harold D. Issacs. Stanford Uni- partly to cash in on the hate-China
Versity Press. 352 pp: $5.
racket, arid partly because any
By ROBERT FRIEDMAN stick is useful to Big Business
The presses are spewing forth against the liberation bound
anti-Chinese books these devs at Isaacs now says he no longer
a pace which biels to match the loves Trotsky, whose introduction
anti-Soviet tonal All the old has been dropped as a liability. In-
China hands who served Western stead, he is an open defender of
imperialism as banker, soldier, spy, imperialist intervention against the
for whatever in the Orient are now people of the Far East.
busy at the typewriter, engaged
in profitable vilification of 450,- weaseling is Isaacs attack on the
But typical of his Trotskyite
000,000 people because they de Chinese Communists of the 1920's,
cided to take their fate in their first because they supported
own hands and build for them- Chiang Kai-shek despite the fact
selves.
that he was to become the butcher
of the Chinese revolution, and sec
One book which deserves, even and because they allegedly cringed
under the cynical and opportunist before Chiang when he turned on
reign of capitalism, some special the workers in 1927.
prize for adaptability is Harold D.
Isaacs Tragedy. of the Chinese
Revolution
This nonsense, which would rule!
Published first in 1938 as an tory on the chance that today's
out every political alliance in as-
avowedly Trotskyite tract (com- ally might be tomorrow's enemy.
plete with introduction by Trotsky) is ironic in view of the fact that
calling the defeat of the Chinese Chiang sits today on Taiwan, a
workers in 1927 a "betraval" by discredited gangster save only in
Stalin and the Chinese Commu- the eyes of Isaacs politics
men-
nists, the same book emerges now, tors.
refurbished, to mourn the victory Meanwhile the Chinese people!
of the very same Chinese workers will go about their business build-
Ja gencration latert
ing socialism, unconcerned by
Isaacs tears for the tragedy of
1927 or 1951.
Filled with the murky intricacies 19
RECUD
H/W ATT 02 TC XAAZ-35786
201-1544-6
7
ان
14-00000
COPY: MK:S8
COMP.
Enclosure No. 1
To De toh No. 3317
7650-) 175/35 REM
sosed
1 Ta Yong Yi Ping Hutung
Feiping, China.
Oct. 5, 1934.
Mг. Т. А. Bisson
136 Claremont Avenue
Mount Vernon, N. Y.
Dear Mr. Bisson:
I have seen the correspondence exchanged between
Mr. Olass and yourself regarding the contributions you
collected for the China Forum. A draft for the sua in
full will be sent to you this week.
I do not know in the name of whom or what Miss Smedley
speaks of the China Forum. Since she was not in China at
the time the Forum Suspended, nor has she corresponded
with me on the subject, I consider it necessary to place
before you and the other contributors an account of the
circumstances in which the Forum ceased publication.
Since you apparently gathered the contributors together
in a meeting to hear what Miss Smedley had to say, I
would appreciate it deeply if you would gather them once
mors to hear my account. The enclosed is a copy of a
letter, sent by me last May to the Chinese Communist Party.
It has been published in China in a Chinese translation
and copies have been sent abroad but has not been pub-
lished in English as far as I know. I do not know the
names of the people who were good enough to contribute
to the Forum but their interest in the matter warrants
placing before them the story of what happened to the
magazine. I trust, out of simple fairness to me, you
will be good enough to give them this opportunity.
I greatly regret any inconvenience or embarrassment
to which you have been put in this matter. I do hope,
however, that my letter will enlighten you and your
friends and enable you to appreciate the difficulties
which have arisen. I know of no project to revive the
China Forum at the present time. Should such occur, the
resultant publication would be of a considerably different
character from the one I edited, as will be obvious from
the facts given in my letter to the C. P. I think people
who are interested in supporting the revolutionary move-
ment here should know these facts.
Once again, I appreciate all the trouble you have
gone to in this matter.
Did you ever, incidentally, receive the article
"Fascism in China" and the newsletter which I mailed to
July 13 last?
Yours sincerely,
(Harold R. Isaacs)
enol.
(Copied by FD)
H/A ATT L'S TO XAA2-35636
811 5034 (Chance / Searclight Pub. Co./58
261-18546
14-00000
COPY
Letter of H. R. Isaacs to the C.C.P. concern-
In the cрада Гогцо
To the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party:
The two-year period of my extra-organizational col-
laboration with the Chinese Communist Party has come to
an end and the China Forum which I founded and edited dur-
ing that time has been forced to suspend publication. In
the interest of our whole movement as well as in my per-
sonal interest, I consider it necessary to record here
and publish the history of the China Forum and the cir
cumstances of its suspension. You refused me the oppor
tunity to lay the matter before the membership of the
party even when I offered to do so in your own organs and
not through the columns of the Forum. when, wrongly, I
permitted the Forum to go down in silence, you turned
around and in your organs and near organs in China and
abroad you proceeded with the usual slanders of "betrayer"
and counter-revolutionary". In so doing you didn't have
the courage or the simple honesty to state that you pre-
sented the China Forum with an ultimatum and forced its
suspension because in reply its editor raised questions
which are being placed before the whole movement today
by the International Left Opposition. Nor did you state
that you deliberately smashed the Forum for this reason
despite my repeated and extended offers to continue publi-
cation as before on a straight anti-Kuomintang, anti-
imperialist basie, leaving these various problems to be
thrashed out first privately among ourselves. In other
worde, you deliberately forced suspension of the China
Forum despite the fact, on your own admission, that its
loss vas a serious plow to the revolutionary movement in
China, that it meant the disappearance of an organ which
for two years you had considered an extremely valuable
instrument in the hands of the movement. Here, as in the
broader issues which led to our differences, your blind
adherence to false policies was once more demonstrative
of your readiness to place your factional interests above
the interests of the Chinese Revolution.
In going back over the history of the Forum, I think
the vicious character of your action becomes even moге
evident when I start with the fact that from beginning to
end I functioned not as a member of the party but as a
wiliing sympathizer who was prepared to throw all his
energiás into a job he saw he could do edit and publish
an organ in China which could help mobilise the forces
of this country for struggle against the Kuomintang and
the imperialists by exposing the regime of terror and
privation which they have in common imposed upon the
masses of the Chinese people. Permit me to recall at
this point that I never accepted any personal remunera-
tion for time or labor. You gave the Forum financial
aid but I never received a dollar from you that was not
put into the paper. I refused your offers of compensa-
tion and earned my living elsewhere. Your only claim on
me was my full-hearted loyalty to the Communist ideal and
our
14-00000
-2-
our common dedication to the struggle against a regime
of hate and misery and oppression. In the end you for-
feited this claim by ceasing any longer to be in my eyes
honest or.effective leaders of this struggle.
Although you helped the Forum financially, the part
you played in building it up from the day it started in
January, 1932, to the day of its last appearance in Janu-
ary 1934, was insignificant. My repeated requests for
cooperation in matters of circulation and material for
publication went largely unsatisfied throughout that time.
You never supplied me with the reports I so frequently
and urgently sought, particularly on trade unions, strike
struggles, the Red Armies, the Red districts, etc. Every
thing thơ Forum did and became was the fruit of the work
of a tiny group of devoted collaborators (the most im-
portant of whom had no connection with you whatever) and
myself who had to depend almost entirely on our own re-
sources for everything we did and published. At every
crisis in the Forum's existence, when it was banned by
the French authorities in Shanghai at the very outset;
when it was bounded and persecuted by the American and
Chinese authorities in the summer of 1933, when through
British police pressure it was thrown out of every avail-
able printing ship in the city; when the pseudo-Fascist
Blue Shirts again and again threatened the printing plant
which I built up partially through personally contracted
loane it was invariably through my own initiative, with
the help of the little Forum staff, that we pulled our-
selves up by the bootstraps every time and carried on to
a point in January this year where the Forum was flourish-
ing and growing daily in circulation, prestige, and in-
fluence despite the many formidable obstacles in its way.
The formation of the China Forum Readers Association,
which in the brief space of three months spread to eleven
cities in five provinces, developing into & mighty poten
tial weapon for the revolutionary movement, was the prod-
uct of spontaneous action on the part of the Forum's
readers, later sponsored and led by the paper itself.
All these were the Forum's own achievements, not yours.
By your arbitrary and criminal action you shattered then
in the full stride of their growth. Because to my bitter
disappointment I had not nor could I secure the resources
to carry on myself - owing largely to the difficult condi-
tions of work and the impossibility of getting revenue
from the paper itself - all that had been achieved and
was to be achieved was ground into the dust.
II.
-
From almost the very beginning of my active work
which I date from the time I began reporting events in
China in a Communist way - a number of questions presented
themselves to me in increasingly forcible form. These
arose originally from my discovery of the gross distor-
tions and exaggerations which I found to be characteristic
of Communist propaganda in China and abroad. I defino
propaganda as the skilful, clear, accurate and wholly
truthful reporting of the facts linked to an incisive,
purposive
14-00000
-3-
purposive interpretation and a plan of action for deal-
ing with the facts in a revolutionary way. I learned
06:00 sie and work of Lenin and his Bolshevik
comrades who taught us that the truth comes from the
masees themselves and that only dienster can result from
telling them lies. I have never learned to the contrary
that it was my revolutionary duty to work in any other
way although I soon found that the present day Communist
Party press makes a practice of distinguishing between
propaganda and truth.
Examples of exaggeration and distortion most strik-
ing to we were naturally those which applied to China,
bocause here I could check allegations with known facts.
I first wrote these down to the ignorance or incapacity
of individuals. I felt that Communist editors abroad
would publish accurate facts about China if they could
get them. Accordingly with a friend I tried to set up.
an independent mail news service and sent weekly bulletins
to papers all over the world giving brief, sharp, factual
accounts of what was going on. This was in the fall of
1931 after my return from the area of the great Central
China floods of that summer. I scarcely understood then
why this service failed to secure any response from the
Communist press abroad. After about three months I had
to suspend it for lack of support. It simply didn't get
published except in a few organs which were not official,
Communist Party papers, including the New York Militant.
It wasn't long before I began to perceive, with a
deeper study of international events and the history of
the Chinese Revolution, that a consistent thread ran
through the distortions and exaggerations which I found
not only in brief casual reports of current events but
in the solemn pronunciamentoes. made by delegates before
plenums of the E.C.C.I. I discovered that these departures
from the truth were made necessary by the official premise
that ever since the catastrophe of 1937 a mighty, upsurg-
ing revolutionary movement has been marching forward in
China to the very brink of seizure of power under the
leadership of the Chinese Communist Party. I discovered
that these exaggerations were necessary because the pre-
isevas false and along with it all the basic tenets of
the policies being pursued by the Communist International
and the Communist Party in China. I cannot begin here to
give a summary of some of these distortions (which I
verbally cited to you by the dozen) ranging from partiou-
lar incidents (the wilfully false picture given of the
cotton mill strike in Shanghai in January, 1933, even to
the point of transposing it to February to heighten the
impression given of the workers' role in the Shanghai war)
to high flown generalisations like the statement recently
made before the Plenum of the S.C.C.I. that the C.C.P. has
won over the majority of the Chinese working class and
the peasantry.
In denying the factual truth of this premise, whence
flows the whole policy of the Communist Party in China, I
deprecate not a whit the magnificent militancy and courage
of Chinese workers, striking again and again and fighting
against
14-00000
-4-
against terrific odds in defense of their very lives;
nor the noroio struggles waged by peasants all over the
country; nor the fight of the Red Armies against the
Kuomintang, I merely respect the cold, indisputable fact
that these struggles are defensive, not offensive, that
they are isolated, desperate and unorganised. with very
few exceptions - a few small strikes here and there and
the larger exception of the Red Army - they are without
organised revolutionary leadership. Moreover the develop-
ment of this leadership, the task of the C.P., 18 proceed-
ing at a tragically retarded pace owing to the false
policies and inept tactics of the party.
In denying the presence of a mighty revolutionary
upsurge (1.6., a vast, organised march toward the seizure
of power) I respect facts made still clearer perhaps when
compared to the facts and figures of the monster mass move-
ments of the 1925-27 period. The tragio errors of the
Communist leadership in 1987 were primarily responsible
for the decapitation of that great movement and because
no lessons have been drawn from those evente to this very
day, these exrore, monstrously accumulated, are still re-
sponsible for the tragedies of today. But for the purpose
of our comparison here, let us for examplo take the single
fact that in 1936 in Greater Shanghai there were 257
strikes. In 1933 there were 82. Let us remember that
on the eve of the workers' seizure of power in Shanghai
in March, 1927, there were more than 800,000 workere,
handicraftamen and petty traders out on the streets fight-
ing with arms in hande for demande of a far-reaching po,
litical character. A close check for the entire country
in the latter half of 1933 showed me that Icas than one-
thirtieth of that number were engaged in strikes and other
disputes during any given month and that almost invariably
the demands were defensive demands against wage cuts and
lockouts. Moreover, the lack of cohesive leadership-
often in departments of the same factory or in one or more
of a group of factories - or even sometimes lack of even
the most elementary organization - has in almost every
case led to deadening failure and relatively easy betrayal
by the yellow labor leaders" and "mediators of the
Kuomintang. In 1985 the shooting of thirteen students
by British police in Shanghai was the touch-off for a
general strike which paralyzed the city and which was
Beconded by vast sympathy strikes which broke like a
series of tidal waves over the entire country. In Janu-
ary, 1932, when the Japanese imperialists used the Shanghai
International Settlement as a base for operations which
cost the lives of tens of thousands of Chinese, not a
single strike interrupted the normal course of the pub
lic or other services in that settlement. In the factories
there were no strikes but a large scale lockout to which
the overwhelming majority of Shanghai's workers submitted
without protest.
The dogged, persistent struggle carried on by small
sections of the rank and file workers in isolated instances
in recent years is tribute to the magnificent fibre of
Chinese
14-00000
-5-
Chinese workero. It is not evidence that a revolutionary
seizure of power is on the order of the day. It is evi-
dence, along with the heroto sacrifices of thousands who
have lost lives and liberty in Chinese revolutionary
struggle during the last seven years of Kuomintang re-
action, that it is possible to fight the monstrous white
terror which Chinese Communists frequently cite as a
reason for the insufficiency of their work. Yet, it is
largely because this terror has not been fought effectively
that the Kuomintang regime, despite the fact that it is
rotting and crumbling, can still keep the lid down on the
boiling, simmering hatred of the people it rules. Unless
the martyrdom of thousands of China's finest workers,
peasants and revolutionary intellectuals is to be in vain,
we must turn resolutely away from the folly of calling to
insurrection when what is needed is painstaking education,
organization and the sponsorship of day-to-day struggles
of the masses for democratic demands, the slow building up
of a party and mass organizations and a movement which
will be able to command the forces capable of carrying out
an insurrection.
In the case of the widespread but isolated and in-
dividual cases of peasant uprisings, and this includes
the Red Armies in Kiangsi, these struggles await the
leadership of a strong working class movement before they
can have a successful issue. The Red Armies in their re-
stricted and surrounded areas and with their meagre re-
sources have fought heroically against the Kuomintang
attacks upon them. But until the Kuomintang is shaken
from its bulwarks in the imperialist controlled working
olass centres, their prospect of revolutionary triumph
remains necessarily dim. No revolutionary purpose is
served by taking refuge in the fiction that these armies
have proletarian leadership because individual workers,
-undoubtedly leaders of superior quality and courage, have
been torn from their factories and their fellow-workere
and sent down to occupy key positions in the Red Army
districts and in the Red Armies themselves. Indeed, this
common practice of extracting the most conscious and pro-
gressive working class elements from their working olass
environment and sending them down to the Red districts ie
a good index to the oriminal transposition of emphasis
which has helped paralyze the working class movement in
the cities. If the White Terror doesn't carry off the
workers' leaders as they arise, the C.P. does and has done
so in hundreds of cases. This helps in no small part to
explain why it has also been impossible to mobilize a
genuine mass anti-Japanese movement in the fact of mili-
tary aggression and why the White Terror of the Kuomin-
tang has succeeded, by filling mass graves and innumer-
able prisons with the martyred dead and living, in down-
ing the anti-imperialist movement or efforts toward the
organization of such a movement and paving the way for
the ever increasing encroachments of the imperialists.
The party has not yet gripped and directed the deep and
bitter and often inarticulate hatred of the masses of the
people for their oppressors and this includes large s80-
tions of the lower netty bourgeoisie who could be won by
successful mass pressure from below. This is because the
14-00000
-6-
Party has failed to translate the realities of everyday
events into its program and tactics..
I cannot here go into the many-faceted problems and
issues which flow from these facts with regard to the
policies and tactics of the Chinese revolutionary movement
Nor extending to the international scene need I go into
the terrific effects of the German catastrophe nor the
storm of questions which has been directed at the C.1.
leadership whose responsibility in the disaster has be-
come nakedly clear to unnumbered Communists and Communist
sympathizers the world over. Nor into the whole set of
implications which arise from the policies of the C.I.,
with particular reference to the late developments in
Soviet foreign policy, the Litvinov-Roosevelt agreement,
the forthcoming mooted entrance of the U.S.S.R. into the
League of Nations and in a smaller but equally character-
istic way, the forthcoming association of the U.3.8.R.
with the Institute of Pacific Relations which hopes to
höld ita next talkfest in Mos০০৯. These problems, with
their many specific links to the Chinese questions, were
the basic questions over which I soon began to take issue
with the official views of the Party and the International.
III.
But precisely because at all costs I desired to carry
on the Forum's oven struggle against the common enemy -
against the Kuomintang and the imperialists - I sedulously
avoided bringing these issues into the coluins of the paper,
increasingly against my better judgment. I leaned over far
backward in this respect. This expressed itself in many
of the current issues with which we had to deal.
I ask you to recall the whole uphill fight which the
Forum waged on behalf of Paul and Gertrud Ruegg in the
spring and summer of 1933 during which time I repeatedly.
warned against the emphasis which was being placed on the
legal aspects of the case and the negotiations with
the Kuomintang to the detriment of mass pressure and the
capitalization of the case for political purposes. You
paid lip service to the need for mass pressure - partiou-
larly here in China- but in fact the "legalities" and
futile negotiations remained the major pillars of the de-
fense. Until in the very end I finally rebelled, I wasn't
even permitted to give Ruegg his honourable and rightful
title secretary of the Pan Pacific Trade Union Secre-
tariat. Yet, although I felt the struggle for the Ruegga
was being seriously handicapped by the tactics being pur-
sued, I carried on the fight with all the energy at my
command and you will recall that it was I who created the
local defense committee and was chiefly responsible for
the widespread press propaganda and the considerable
sympathy which we aroused. Yet the strictly non-political
attitude which Ruegg was forced to assume at the trial
(in contrast to the highly political atitude of his
prosecutors) was in my opinion one of the major reasons
for the fate to which he and his wife were condemned.
I ask you to recall the whole period of the organisa-
tion and activities of the China-League for Civil Rights,
from December, 1933, to June, 1933, in which I took an
notive pert. I gave full play to this hybrid League and
its work without once publishing the basic criticisms
which in the end were wholly confirmed by what happened
after the Kuomintang murdered Yang Chien in June that year.
I ask you to recall the views I set forth in August
and Sentember, 1933, on the subject of the anti-War Con-
gress" which at your specific request I did not publish.
Instead, to my regret, I published the foul rot of Mar-
ley & Co., without freely giving play to the true facts
about that farcical junket which had convinced me that
the policies which gave it birth do not one single whit
advance the international struggle against imperialist
war.
On one occasion and this at least I can take com-
fort in I passively resisted when you requested me to
write and publish a slanderous attack on Chen-Tu-hoiu
when he was condemned to 13 years imprisonment by the
Kuomintang. Your request was specific. I was not to
deal with the issues which had brought Chen Tu-hsiu from
being the leader of the C.P. in 1937 to being leader of
the Chinese Opposition in 1933. I was only to string to
gether a vile series of labels in an effort to explain
why the Kuomintang even imprisoned the leader of the
Left Opposition. As you know, that attack was never
written or published.
Again in December, 1933, upon my return from Fukien,
you specifically demanded that I set aside the results of
my own personal investigations in Foochow in order to
write on your behalf (but over my signature!) an utterly
baseless and slanderous attack on the Left Opposition.
You will recall that you charged at that time that the
"Trotskyists were prominently identified with the new
government set up in Fükien by Chen Ming-shu and Taai
Ting-kai. You lumped the Left Opposition with the Third
Party and the so-called Social Democrats among the petty
bourgeois satellites of the Fukien militarists. It was
as much to satisfy myself on this very point as to per-
form a mission for you that I went down to Foochow and
spent two weeks there and learned through direct contact
with dozens of people prominently concerned that the Left
Opposition were stoutly and clearly opposed to the Foochow
regime. I haven't place bare to discuss the relations of
the C.P. to the short-lived Fukien Government or the char-
acter of the "negotiations which were going on down there..
The important thing here is that on my return you demanded
that I write clanders which flew in the face of everything
I myself had learned. It is interesting, as a sidelight
on your methods in factional strife as you conceive it,
that your representative in Poochow sent back a report,
through me, ironically enough, that one of the most prom
inent of the youthful pseudo-radicale in Foochow, Bน
Chi-yuen
14-00000
-7-
Chi-yuen to be exact, was a leading "Trotskyist". It so
happened itati hai sat and had several lengthy interviews
with Wu and by the time I left Foochow I understood his
position and his personality exceedingly well. He was as
much a Trotskyist as Mel Lan-fang is! Yet you actually
demanded that I ignore my own knowledge of the man and in
my article on Fukien set him down as a "Trotskyist". I
was faced on the one hand by your demands that I write
falsehoods to suit your policies and on the other by my
deep desire to set forth the actual facts about the Oppo-
sition's attitude towards the Fukien regime. But once
more, to preserve the shreds of our relationship, I drove
a middle course and did neither, leaving the whole question.
out of my article.
Despite the facts that these issues weighed more and
more heavily upon me, despite the fact that events in
China and abroad were pressing themselves sore and more
imperatively on the concerns of every sincere revolution-
ary, I still tried to keep the Forum balanced on its
ribbon-like path, concentrating on the anti-Kuomintang,
anti-imperialist struggle, and in so doing fulfilling at
least a partial function as a revolutionary organ. I
deeply felt, however, that I was betraying my readers by
avoiding these issues. How could I write of Germany and
avoid all the implications of that disaster? How could
I write of America's recognition of the U.S.S.R. and still
fail to say that the Communist International had virtually
been murdered at Washington? How could I warn against the
dangere of imperialist intervention in the U.S.S.R. and
still not point out that Soviet foreign policy was in
fact daily heightening the danger of such intervention?
Yet I somehow did so and sought in whatever way possible
to retain some basis for our continued collaboration.
IV.
Nevertheless, abruptly in January of this year you
forced an ultimatum upon me and subsequently forced the
break in our relationship because I could not and would
not, at your demand, devote the China Forus to policies
which I could not and do not believe compatible with the
interests of the Chinese Revolution and the international
proletarian revolution. I could not, at your demand, set
aside the convictions to which I had literally been driven
by the stinging lash of catastrophic events in China,
Germany and the world over. Particularly my deep inter-
est in Chinese events during the last three years made it
impossible for me, finally, to give active support to
policies and tactics whose disastrous effects were being
a thousandfold confirmed for me by the tragic events of
every swiftly-passing day. I could not ignore questions
which strike at the roots of our work and the whole struc-
ture of our hopes for a revolutionary future.
Despite the fact that these questions are rocking
the entire International today, you denied my right to
raise
14-00000
-8-
raise them in print. You demanded more. You demanded
that I attack anybody who did so - primarily the people
you call "counter-revolutionary Trotskyists" - the only
people who are facing these problems today in a fearless,
revolutionary way. You demanded that the China Forum
become a stereotype for the policies and vulgar faction-
al slanders which I could neither then nor now be party
to. In reply to my questions on China you simply quoted
back to me the lies and half-lies I've been so used to
reading in Inprecorr. You even declared: "For propa-
ganda purposes a certain amount of exaggeration is neces-
sary... and went on amasingly to say: "but we know the
true facts and we base our policies on them, not on theseе
exaggerations! A new slant on modern-day C.I. tactics!
Facts, you said, are curious things. They have to be
turned around and around and around and examined closely
until