1104-10069-10177
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
TO: Director, Domestic Contact
ATTN: OSS (Grant)
FROM: Chief, Miami Field Office
SUBJECT: Gordon Cooper and Associates
REF: COA(S) 322/16265-72
1.On 22 June 1972 we met at some length with Leroy Gordon
Cooper: President, Gordon Cooper and Associates, Hangar One,
Opa-Locka Airport, Opa-Locka, Florida, a peripheral benefit of
this meeting was the acquisition of additional information concern-
ing Gordon Cooper and Associates (QCA) which may have a bearing on
the referenced COA(S) and possibly on future clandestine interest
in the organization.
2. QCA was formed roughly two years ago as an aerospace and
airline management consultant firm. Cooper stated that the organ-
ization may be disbanded shortly because of disagreements between
Cooper and one of his partners, Mel Adler. Adler supposedly is a
stock manipulator who, Cooper feels, was operating outside
the law and therefore not the type of person with whom Cooper desires
to associate. Adler has refused to sell his stock in QCA and to
disassociate himself with QCA so the firm will probably be allowed
to simply run out of business. QCA will be replaced with Gordon Cooper
Consultants Corporation which will be incorporated either in Nevada
or the Republic of Panama. The activities will remain the same and
a Miami office will be maintained.
3. In addition to activities within his own firm, Cooper is a
member of the Board of Directors of Casino Management International
(CMI), Grand Cayman Island. CMI is controlled and operated by Edward
Cellini, Robert (mau) Cellini, and Dino (mm) Cellini and its
activities center around the establishment and operation of gambling
casinos throughout the world. Cooper claims that he has assured himself that
CMI operates within the limits of US laws even though they are headquartered
in Grand Cayman and that the Cellini brothers, all US citizens, are law-
abiding businessmen operating a legitimate business. He claims that there
is disclosure of all personnel connected with the organization, and
that CMI cooperates completely with the FBI. Cooper frankly stated that
he is using his name and his ability to capitalize on
his astronaut days to introduce CMI to individuals
and government in countries throughout the world.
06772
14-00000
MIM-096-72
4. Cooper has recently been instrumental in the establishment
of a casino in Istanbul, Turkey, and he is currently assisting in
the negotiations for the establishment of additional casinos in
Ankara and Izmir. CMI now operates a casino in Yugoslavia and is
bidding on the establishment of an additional one in a Yugoslav
location which Cooper cannot recall. In conjunction with CMI, Cooper
is working on the establishment of a travel club which would, in
addition to offering tour packages to various parts of the world,
offer junkets to gambling casinos. CMI would fund the travel expenses
of those individuals who could be counted upon to gamble heavily at
CMI casinos. As an aside, Cooper cautioned that CMI has "fantastic"
files on individuals in all parts of the world who are known to be
habitual gamblers. These files include their spending habits, income
and outgo and general financial situation.
5. The Haitian airline possibility as reported in reference has
no connection with CMI. Cooper is very interested in the project, is
pursuing it personally and expects to have soon definite word from
the Government of Haiti after a trip to Haiti within the next week or
two. If the deal reaches fruition, Cooper will be closely associated
in Haiti with one Norman Dupree, a Canadian citizen who allegedly is
the former president of the telephone company in Haiti and who has
extremely close ties with the Haitian government.
6.Cooper reiterated and emphasized his willingness to cooperate
with the Agency in whatever manner would be considered appropriate. He said
that he felt very strongly about such cooperation and that we should
feel at complete liberty to approach him personally at any time on any
matter of interest to CIA. Bio data is being forwarded.
GRICE E. MAINWARING
Donald J. Mc
23953
14-00000
06772
CONFIDENTIAL

