14-00000
104-10250-10199
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
리지
TO: Deruty Chief, SSD
22 June 1951:
FRO: Chief, Special Referral Branch
SUBJECT:
STST
HIDALGO, Balmes, Jr.
#65077
The Subject is a covert employee of this Agency now in the
Urited States for four weeks training and being considered for
vce by Staff C/ICB in a highly sensitive assignment. Immigratior
authorities may submit questions through this Agency which will
te answered by the Subject, but reçuests to have the Subject tes-
tify ir open court hearings must be refused.
DETAILS
1. Reference is made to the letter received by the Alien
Affairs Staff from the Immigration and Naturalization Service
and reference to your request of 15 June 1954 tc ascertain the
details of the Subject's status with this Agency and prepare a
reply to I&NS.
2. On 17 June 1954 Special Agent Chester R. HOACSC of this
cffice interviewed Fr. Fobert DAHLGREN, Acting Chief, WH/FT, Room
1128 "T" Building, and 93 John BONNET) Chief, WH/Panama, Room
220 "uarters "J", 156, regarding the Immigration request. The
following information was obtained during this interview.
2.
The Subject is still a covert employee of this Agency,
is now in the United States (New York City) on home leave, and
is scheduled to report to Washington, D.C., to commence four
weeks of covert trainingon 6 July 1954.
b. The Subject is presently under consideration by Staff
C/JCB for an assignment with a highly sensitive project under
the supervision of Staff C/ICB. Under this proposed assign-
ment any publicity or notoriety that the Subject would receive
from testifying publicly on questiors of Communist associations
of which he may have knowledge would ultimately preclude his
future use with the Steff C project and would probably jeopar-
dize his future as a covert employee of this Agency.
c.
If the Staff Cassignment, tdoes not materialize, the
Futject will return id iCalboa Cabreraucanal Panama Canal Rone) on
Fone on approxi-
netely 15 August 1954 as a case officer, and this position
would also be jeopardized by undue publicity.
14-00000
GIRU
3. . DATORE
standpoirt orly there
viewth the Sut fret
ject while he is still 1: Mew York City. This, however, would
have to be coordinated with Stare le for possible obiections
that they night raise in view of their proposed use of the Sub-
ject.recrested that he le informed of any action
teker in this matter and any rublic testimer or cper court tes-
tinory would have to derend or the seriousness of the case being
prevared by the Immigratior authorities.
and . CarDindicated that from a Wi
would te ro crfection to a controlled inter-
if the intervier could be afforded the Sub-
h. Ary cortact with the Subject during his period of covert
training from 6 July to approximately 15 August 1954 would have to
also be cominated with fr. Eeter HOEWEL Covert Training Officer,
OTE, whose cffice is located in Building-31.
5. In Pure 1951 Special Agent HOATSON cortected ir. Faul 03
FRID Staff -/ICE, 1613 "I" Building, x668, to discuss the Sub-
ject's future position and also the recuest received from IIS.
The following factors were obtained from Mr.(BIRKE
03
a. The Subject's use in the proposed Staff C project is
still in the plarning stage, but the assignment that the Sub-
ject is being considered for is a highly sensitive one and
any further publicity which the Subject may receive would
ultimately discualify him for consideration on this project.
b. Any approval for INS contact of the Subject would
have to be determined after carefully considering the impor-
tance of the TONS case for which the Subject's testimony may
be recuired. PERVE Jindicated that the Subject could still
be considered as an employee of Division regardless of whe-
ther or not the proposed Staff C/TCR assignment materializes
and any action in the request received from INS should be
closely coordineted with both Staff C and .
6. Mr. PEN! TNGTON, Alien Affairs Staff, SO, contacted William
A. HOGAN, Special Assistant to the Commissioner of Immigration and
Naturalization on 18 June 1954 requesting further information re-
garding their memorandum of 9 June 1954 on the Subject. Mr. HOGAN
explained that I'NS has a list of possible informents which contains
the Subject's name. The people on this list are being contacted for
use on a continuing besis wher specific cases arise which nicht
fall in their particular area of knowledge. At the present time,
INS has no specific case forwhich they want to contact the Subject,
but they just want to know if he would be available in the future
for use as ar informert regarding various Communist activities of
which the Subject has personal knowledge.
2 -
14-00000
Q
03
?.
After his conversation with Or. HOGY, . PENNTINGTON
Sorteta rous of the ES recuert would not be cor-
sidered out of order, but recorrerá-d cooperating to the extent
thet could submit specific questions to this Agency which
could be preserted to the Subject and the answer forwarded to
S. The refusel of their original remest should be based on
the sensitivity of the Subject's positior which could be jeopar-
Sired try urave publicity and also er tid fret that the Sub-
Frettes frequently and it would be it to locate hin
ant contact was
Dr. Janes STROUST, lien iffrire Staff/Sc, stated on 18
June 1991 that Fr. HOGAR, Special ssistant to the Commissioner
of Immigration and Naturalization, hac indicated in a conversation.
SFROVEL on 8 June 195L that ISMS had been able to locate
the Entfect's location and affiliation with this Agency through
The Forcet's father who told the inspector that the Subject was
"Jed this Agency in Ealboa, Paname, Canal Zore, which appears
teler security flap on the part of the subject's father.
16-4
T
agreed
03
r. John B
Chief, IH/Paname, was recontacted on 18
Land informed of the nature of the NE recvest and als o
nice of the apparent security flap on the part of the Subject's
father.030n the basis of this further information, it was suggesteć
to fr. POWET that the TANS authorities be requested to submit ary
cuestiors through this Agency which would, in turn, be presented to
the Subject and his answers be returned to JS. ir. GOMED agr
to the proposal of having the TOWS people contact the Subject
through this Agency and also indicated that the reported security
breach on the part of the Subject's father would be taken into
consideration and an attempt would be made to determine the extent
of the Subject's relatives or acquaintances know of the Subject's
employment by this Agency. Mr3 Paul FIRKE, Staff C/ICB, also
greed to the proposed procedure and requested that any and all
action taken be coordinated with Hand Staff C.
ACTION
It is recommended that the attached memorandum to IANS and to
the Chief, MH Division, with a carbon copy to Staff C/ICE, be for-
warded and that no further action betaken pending a report from Mr.
BOTEC Yegarding the seriousness of the security flap from an oper-
Stional standpoint.
Charles W. Fane
Attachments
1
Letter to TS
1 - Letter to WH with cc to Staff C/JCB
6/23/51
GIN
3