14-00000
104-10130-10215
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, Cover Support Desk
FROM
:
Mr. Robert J. Leonard
NOTE:
I requested Bat
Leonard to goue me a
copy of this
mimi
M.K. Holbik
RO/PSD
10/20/00
SUBJECT
:
TARASOFF, Anna
#131751 B-SB/2
DDS/1&S
GIST:
A special meeting was convened to consider the problem
of the prospective visit of Subject's father to the Russian
Embassy to obtain a visa. It was determined that he should
not be briefed in advance and that an army cover be provided
for Subject.
DETAILS:
1. On 13 October 1960 the undersigned as representative
of the Office of Security met with Mr. Birch_O'Neal, CI Staff;
T.K. Chalmers, CI/Projects; Henry C. Woodward, CCG/DC; 03
Thornton W. Means, OCG/OCB and the Subject to discuss the
problem of a prospective trip to the Russian Embassy by the
Subject's father for a trip to Russia.
2. Mr. O'Neal had Mrs. TARASOFF recount the details of
the situation. She said that several months ago her father
ANTHONY ADAMOVIEZ had indicated an interest in attempting
ADDS/I&S to locate his brother and sisters in Russia. He sent
Chief/SSD
Dep Chief
correspondence to his home town and received a reply from
his sister MARIYA KALNAK, c/o KALINOTSKIY, VZDEN SKIY RAYON,
MINSKAYA, U.S.S.R.. She stated that his brother IVANU
A to Chief YULYANOVICHU ADOMOVICHU was also living. This correspondence
Ch. CSR
Ch. SRD
inspired ADAMOVIEZ with the desire to visit his brother and
sister in Russia pod his retirement. ADOMOVICHU, age 66,
in good health, recently retired from his job as a laborer
Ch... with American Steel and Wire Company and is now determined to
Ch. Sup. Br. Visit Russia. Subject's mother has no intention of returning
Desk 1B-
Desk SB-
to Russia.
3. Mrs. TARASOFF, SOFF, on her return from a short vacation
Ad & To visit to her husband BORIS D. TARASOFF, an Agency employee
Control Decon TDSY in Mexico, visited her parents in Ohio and was informed
Files
PSD
SECRET
eR
i
of her father's intention to come to Washington to make
inquiry at the Russian Embassy in regard to his visit to
Russia. Subject's father wished Subject to accompany him
but she indicated that as a government employee she did
not want to go there.
064. Mrs. TARASOFF says that her oldest sister, Mrs.
Sherry COMELLA knows of her CIA employment and the necessity
not to divulge this information. Subject stated that her
father and mother know only that she is a government employee.
They are not interested in the Agency or Department where
she or her husband is employed. Subject also advised that
although her landlady and Sears Roebuck Department Store know
her as CIA she is not aware that anyone else knows.
5. Mr. O'Neal asked what could be done about this
situation. Mr. Means said that Subject's husband is in
Mexico under light state cover but had previously been 32
backstopped firmly as a contract employee of the Department 52
of State, Escort Branch, Division of Language Services. He
said he would firm up this backstop so that in the event of
inquiry at that Division of State it would be confirmed thats
he is in Mexico on an assignment. Mr. Woodward stated that
he would provide a U.S. Army Translation Unit cover for 32
Mrs. TARASOFF retroactive to her entrance on duty. The.
ündersigned stated that he would conduct expedite credit
checks on the Subject and her husband to ascertain whether or
not they had been recorded as Agency employees.
6. It was agreed among the conferees that since the
father of Subject was unwitting of Subject's CIA employment
he would not be specially briefed on what to answer in the
event that the question was asked in connection with his
VISA application. It was agreed that not knowing the specific
Department of Government he would have to consult his daughter
and then she could give the cover which had been prepared for
her. The undersigned pointed out the possibility that Subject's
father might know of Subjects employment but it was agreed
that in view of his age and background employment but it was improbable
and that it would be better not to brief him specifically
on Subjects employment but to let the question be handled
naturally.
SECRET
LIBR
7. Subsequent to the meeting expedite credit checks on
the Subject and her husband revealed no record at either the
Credit Bureau or Stone's. It has subsequently been learned
that Subject's father had visited the Embassy and had been
asked to give a short history and the names of his children.
Subject was listed by her father in her maiden name.
Consequently no further difficulty is expected in this matter.
The Office of Security is to be kept advised of further
developments in this case by T. K. Chalmers, Subject's
supervisor.
ACTION:
None. Information only.
Robert J. Lemand
Robert. Leonard
* Note: The question of
Subject and/or her husbands
employment did not care up
and accordemely was not
given the her father or the
person interviewing - Jille
SECRET