14-00000
104-10172-10001
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
No. of F
16-7
23
INTER
toral File No:
Berets Made By Howard it. Antell
Distribution: nch (2)
By copy to: Kox] (1)
10(Kina (1)
Files (1)
Crally to:
Koše available to the Enbessy and G
1
Source Cryptonym: Sources Identified
Source, Operational Data, and Comments:
23.
References:
[T:15 indicated that the iluzdquarters of the Carithean Legion wore being
transferred to Panama whore it could count on the aid of the AKIAS government",
and that Julio Mori Masegoza, motive in the Caribbean Legion, would remain
in Mexico dedicating himself to the purchase of gold and its clandestine
exportation to Guatemala and Panama.
TAM-439
639 roquested confirmation of the above information.
It is possible that the attached report nay tend to confirm part of this
information.
гоем ২০.
F10403-10
Classification
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
100-18 1
14-00000
:
!
:
t
Subject: Gold Shipments
Place Acquired: Panama City, Panama
Panama City, Panama]
Evaluation:
Source:
23
Report No: [12
764
Date of information: Way - July 1950
Date Acquired: June-July 1950
Date of Report: 10 July 1950
-
1.
it
レーン 1. 2 reported that an 7 Kay 1950 a B-26 type bocter arrived in David, Panama,
from Browneville, Texas, due to a low gasolice supply. The plane was tuaded for
Tocumen Airport in Panicma City, and carried as. a crew the following acoording to
-
Frark OHGFL, U.S. Citizen, Pilot
O. KARTINEZ, U.S. Citizen, Co-Pilot
Steve UPAY, U.S. Citizen, Vechanic
Mauricio CASTRO, Panamanian, Passenger
05
1)
(A tirs blew out at David, and ir. John
Civil Aeronautics technician at
Tocumen Airport was instrumental in getting a spare tire to them,
05
2. Nr. LERO sdvised this office that he had mot Stove LURRAY in Havara in
Apr-11 1950 in company with a fellow razed ZORILLO, who claimed to have scre
connection with the Secret Police, in-Lexicon Lac described MURRAY has an
adventurer who had been in the Philipires and the Far East and whom he suspected
of gold smuggling activities. Laid that KURRAY was pilot of the plera
and he thought it was unusual that ce fest a plane is this and as expensivo to
operate was being used when it had comparatively little cargo space. In Vay
1950, when KURKAY was in Panama, he told Lion that he was buying orchid bults.
05
1998. On 16 June 1950 the following information was received(from Civil Intelligence
✓ Section, Panama Canal, regarding this matter?
20
It-has-been-reported-that Very frequently a B-26 airplane (N5546N - & Martin
Varauder) makes trips between Tocunca and David, R?. It is piloted by
Steve MURRAY, andiat least two other Americans ride on the plane, which-16 who ma
sometimes met at Tocucen Airport by either Tito, Harmodito or Toni ARIAS.
On landing at the airport it goes directly to a hangar, and allegedly the
only ones who visit it are the ARIAS brothers, PASTOR Ponce, Chief of the
hirport, and one (Inu) LINARES, Chief of Customs at Tocumen.
Informant stated that it was believed et first that the plane was engaged
in area contraband, but later it appeared more logical to assume that it
was involved in another type of smuggling, poscibly drugs.
Virgilio PAVIPEZ, then Chief of the Control Tower, is said to have stated
that the plane comes and we without being registered at the airport under
orders of Polresttofanager; that the plane lands without signalling
7
14-00000
5
ty ratio or talking to anyone for four of doter:!a at Alirook Fiold, but
1st 1: 13 sided by us of a 11ht wirt strates that the told 10/
five for lantis domiladore Jiany told
te that i'arcalo air agroucent with the Heird states regarding landing
rules wow tiority belie; violated, and that these two son wore afterwards
reacted from their joba.
Firscreant acle that the above plane Lnded at Toetsen from Havid on 11 kay.
at 5:15 p.c., on 12 bay at 6:51 p.n., on 14 Nay at 6:19 p.m. and on 16 Kay
at 9:36 8..
The above information was allegedly given to Prestient ARIAS by the Kinister
of covestment and Justice, and he apparently shored little interest in the
subject, acrely stating that the ratter should be tavestigated to see whất
there is to it."
Upon receipt of this information it appeared that Tirgilio RAMIREZ might have
been the source, since he was fired from his post at Tocumen Airport and was
diseled about it. It was ascertained that the information contained i
the above) paratrany, in which RAMIREZ is mentioned, res reported by RA THEZ (but
the vicer information came from other Civil Intelligence sources.
.05 in the plane mentionedator
4. 6 July advised that the stove-plare-and Stevo LURRAY had re-
turned to Forma and that the Minister of Government had ordered that the plane
by dissentled and searched, but he could not ascertain the basis for the search.
Lihad talked to the Kanager of the airport, Esfael PASTOR Porce, and with
Toni Flas, Director Gonoral of Civil Aeronautics, ai a rephew of President
Ariss, to indicated that they were aware of the Kinister of Government's order
but did not know what was behind it. Both felt that it was an extreme measure,
which should not be carried out.
5. Ca 8 July 1950 Kr. MURRAY called at the Embassy to obtain assistance in
securing the release of his plane. Briefly he stated that he had departed
from Kexico City via Wanagua and arrived at Tocumen at 7:30 p.m. 5 July. His
passport reflected the following:
Name: Steven T. Hurray
Fassport No.: 1024
Issueda Kanila, Lacenter 2, 1946.
Renewed: Kanila, Deconter 27, 1948
Expires: Deconter 1, 1950
:
He furnished the following additional informations
Type of Planes Converted B-26
U.S. Registrys N 5546 N
Pilot and Owners Steven T. Murray
Copfiots Frank Oorgel, U.S. citizon
Flidt Engineers Cristobal Wartinez, Noxicon citizen
Pasangers Kauricio DE CASTRO, Paramanian citizen (bearer of official
passport), passenger from Lexico City to Tocumen
Destinations Brownsville, Texas
Purpose of Trips Business
溯
14-00000
He stated that he was in the export-izport business and that he dealt in gold.
He said that he had come to Fantra to see a man by the taze of SAS, a cold
dealer from Buenos Aires, about gold shipcerta..........
nd
مدم
۵۰۰۰۰۰۰
6. On 8 July, Kinister of Government Alfredo A reported the matter to
the U.S. Ambassador, stating that prior to arriving in Parasa the place bat
beon signaled, that all was not well at the airport and that, the crew had
Jettisoned cargo prior to arrival. (A check with the dir Force authorities
does not confirm that any such message was sent and Wiwitar denies that a
Leone thing was jettisoned. Ho irsisted that he was coming to Parana to discuss the
acet gold business but that he had no cargo. The Kirister also advised the Ambassador
that PASTAR Ponce had been fired as head of the air
⑦
D
05
July iman
7. In a conversation with PASTOR Porce and LURRAY on the night of 8 July
was advised that PASTOR Ponce had, in fact, beon fired and that he was deter-
mined to bump off Toni ARIAS. Both NERAY and PASTOR toate claized that Toni
ARIAS was behind it all but that Pastor Ponce was the fellay.
6. The Lexicon/referred to, Cristobal Ted, and the Lexicon, ZOHIO,
are believed to be identical. Sis has toen identified as Ferrarders, a cold
dealer, who operates in Buenos Airco ani Montevides. Civil Intelligence Sou-
tion-has-advised that SAS was staying with Toni ARIAS and thitus-had departed
from Panama hastily. Cis-also-advised that President ARIAS at first-had givon
ordore for the/dismissal of both his nephew, Toni AS, and PASTCR Ponce, but
it was later agreed that Toni ARLAS would not be fired to avoid a public scandle
involving the President's family.
9(1
din iayed
9.The present status of the matter is that the plane has been searched with
nogative results, that the plane is still being held by the Paramanion authori-
arties and that HURRAY and others are endeavoring by every means possible to
secure the release of the plane. The head of the Cocumen Airport, PASTOR Ponce,
has been dismissed and Toni ARIAS, the President's rephew, will probably be
allowed to withdraw from his position gracefully.)
Distributions
Wash (2)
10
Nord (1)
Kana (1)
Files (1)
gr