14-00000
104-10175-10133
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SUBJECTS LIHUFF-1 (1-
The attached explains the involvement
of Subject in the circunscances surrounding.
the recruitment attempt and personal harrassment
of Soviet official ABCDET (201-733422) in
June, 1968.
02
The narrative is presented by Keith 06,08
Cameron JOHNSON (201-837607), Dean of Hen
at the University of the Azerices, Americas, who was
७४
1
deeply involved in the coeration. While no
apparent direct or sericus damage to LIHUFF-1
resulted from this, it must be borne in mind
that Jo Johnson did did rent his house from LIHUFF-1
and that if the Soviets ever had suspicions of
16-3
LIBUFF-l's relations with the Station, L-l's
appearance in these events might be viewed
by the Soviets as possitly more than coincidence.
14-00000
:
:
LEVENDE
After letting
Jord
(1)
COSBURY
off on a dark side road, 1 parked by car
nearby and then walked back to my iso.
to
02
AGRODENT the
I saw that the old car,vich we saw
and/policeman was
there, so I crept through the bushes up to the wall, clinted over the back
wall of my yard, and crept along the side keeping in the shadows and trying
to see irto my house to see if anybody was in there. I finally rade my way.
to the back door. Looked in and determined that there was not anybody in there,
but if there was I had every right to come into my com house, and I found that
I was not particularly afraid so I decided to go in. I quietly opened the
back door, came into the house, quickly looked around the corner into the
bedroom and into the bathroom, end decided that there was not anybody in there.
I walked over and closed the front door, which was wide open, quickly drew
tue drapes and turned off the lights. I then changed into old clothes and
tennis shoes, got a flashlight and walked over to the kitchen windor, shined
my flashlight into the face of one of the men sitting in the car just outside.
I was only able to shine it on one sans face so I held it there for a little
while then snapped it off and walked back to a good corner inside the house.
There I waited with the flashlight in hand knowing that the people outside
could not enter through the front door and if they entered through the back
'Coor I'd beable to club one of thez and kick the other one before either of
them was able to do anything. I stood there and heard them come up to the
front door and try the front door. But, when they were unsuccesful they
didn't do any more or come around to the back. They then got into their car,
started it up, turned it around and drove off. While they were turning arouni
I went out the back door, climbed up on a sink, so I could see over the wall,
and watched them drive off. I didn't really know how many people were outside.
Nor did I know how many people had left in the car. Thinking that this mient
have been a decoy and that they right have left somebody behind. I silently
climbed up on to the roof of the house and walked across the roof and peeper,
:
!
over the cage thinking that if there was one person left behind I could Jump
en hin from the roof and sericusly injure him. There was not anybody there
LIKUFF-1
so I left the house, walked up to the landlord's house,
and told the family that there had been teze strage people hanging around
when I came tone, that they had lunged for the car and made an obvious attet
1
and
YRS
:
14-00000
:
(2)
to get at the door handle, and that I had no idea who they were ete. I was
cufficiently scared and put the car in reverse, backed up and took it down
and parked it out of sight. I cxplained that I had climbed over the back
wall and co ca. They wero quiet aware of the problem cince they had observed,
or thought they had observed, people hanging around the house all day. They
pointed out to me too, that when their 18 year old son, Eill, was riding on
horseback he encountered two men who had just arrived in a white Camaro driven
by a middleaged or younger blond lady. They got out of their car and walked
up to my house. One of them, he said, was carrying a pipe and the other one
was carrying a screwdriver. The son asked if he could help these me but they
rushed him off saying that he couldn't The two men peered in the front gate
and stayed around, hanging around for quite a while until a blue Chevrolet
appeared and two people got out of it and went inside the house. While
these people were inside the house, the two men cutoice is sound near the
house.
•
LIHUFF-1
After spending sometime in the house,
reported to me
two men came out and there was some confusion going on around the car and they
couldn't seem to be able to start it. Finally, the two men who had been inside
two cen
LIHUFF-1
the house left and the other/got in the car and left. None of the
family was exactly sure what was going on except that there was confusion
around the car. Eventually all the people left one way or another.
:
I said that I was very concerned about these people hanging around my
house, That I didn't like the idea of people being inside my house and I
LIHUFF-1
wanted to call the police. Mrs.
said that she had called her husband
and he was coming right home, and that he had some very good contacts in'
LINPURE
and he would probably be able to help out in this matter. I
agreed to wait until he got home and that I would go and get my car and bring
it back home, which I then did. I spent the rest of the night with the
LIMUFF-1s
visiting and as quickly as possible I moved the conversation
away from this to other colpletely unimportant things. I decided in the
LIHUFF-i
that there probably was not any reason to get concerned
presence of.
!
ebout this, that it was probably just soma students trying to make me look
2
:
foolish or something on that order.
:
14-00000
(3)
LIHUFF-I
:
One thing that I forgot to mention was that Hrs...
was extremely
upset because a tall blond men/a Mexican policeman came up to her house after
the kids reported the people left. They reported that a car had been stolen.
She asked who the blond man was, and he said he wanted to call his embassy, Sne
brightened up and and asked if he was an American, but he said no, "URS."
One of the kids asked if "URS" meant U.R.S.C., and he rade no attempt to hide
LIHUFF-1
the fact that he was from the Soviet Embassy. They barged in the
house, and in fact it was later reported that he tried to talk to Krs.
in Russian which upset her even more. The tall blond min used the telephone,
knows, he did call his embassy.
LIHUFF-1
and as far as Mrs._
LINUFF-1
Earlier, when I arrived at the University behind the Russian car, I
told the Lt., for the University police force that I wanted the car towed
away at 9:30 the next morning if it was still there at the time. and he enf
that he would be glad to if it was.
LINUFF-1s
:
When I went to get my car after talking to the
around 23:30
hours. I did go dom the road past the entrance to ay house out to the rain
highway Jr.t to look around. I went down as far as The Lady's Bar. When I
passed the corner of the main highway and the road leading off from it to my
house, I saw a blue Chevrolet which looked very much like the ear we had pushed
down to the University and some people standing around it including at least
one uniformed policeman. I concluded that this was connected with this case.
I went down to The Lady's Bar, turned around and came back up the main highway,
but from a point considerably below from where that car was parked until con-
siderably past it I kept a bus between those people and myself and I don't
think, on the bases of later things that they have said, that they saw me come
back up the hill. The bus effectively shielded mo all the way up. I went
clear up to Cuajimalpa then and turned down the road that leads to my house
so I didn't have to pass them again and went on in and parked my oar inside the
compound.
!
The next morning I went to the University at about 8 d'olook and noticed
APORET'S
that
blue Chevy was gone from the parking lot. Then I worked until
my secretary notified mo that some Federal plaindlothes policemen were there
IDEN-E
looking for
১ I imzaediately went to my office and found three or foar
Federal policemen outside the office and unfortunately the Lt. of our police
IRS
1