14-00000
104-10111-10079
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
43872
DAVID CHRIST
14 August 1961
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
The day after her husband's arrival in the United States on 16 Sep 1960, Mrs. Christ
was interviewed by the Agency. Mrs. Christ had very little knowledge of the operations
and her husband's work but did discuss the meetings she attended
with her husband and other matters.
Mrs. Christ was relatively new to Washington and her experience in the
surveillance field was very limited. Her husband's activities and
surveillance were relatively low key.
Mrs. Christ was contacted by a member of the Chief of Station's
Operations Branch and this initial meeting did acquaint her with the
organization and the operation in which her husband and other
technicians were involved. She was told that her husband's activities
involving clandestine surveillance were being conducted under the
auspices of the State Department. The location of the operation
was in Havana, Cuba. Mrs. Christ was told that her husband's job was
to report his experiences to the Chief of the Operations Branch.
She had never personally met any employees of the CIA. Mrs. Christ
was told that her husband had been employed by a Cuban concern, a
Cuban Department employee and as an agent were apprehended by the Cuban
Government. She was also told that the State Department employee
(placed under State Department cover). Although the name of the agent (Fordson) was
not mentioned at this time, she read about him in various news
paper accounts at the time of the trial. Mrs. Christ was also told
that the operational indulgence had reached a point where if discussed
to the press, it would not only jeopardize the security of the United
States Government, but would also endanger her husband and probably brutal
interrogation of her husband by the Cubans and probably the Russians as
well.
Mrs. Christ was given as much information as possible about her husband's
cover story. He was employed by a cover organization, Vachats Vachats Associates,
located in New York City and had been provided documentation, such as a driver's license and a total security clearance. Geist understood
the reasons for this cover; it was easier for her husband to pass
as a bachelor than to disclose the existence of a family. At a time
where the activities of his organization were discussed, prior to
their arrest, been discussed with Mrs. Christ. Mrs. Christ was informed
that in the event of danger the technicians planned to escape to an
apartment which was occupied by an awaiting State Department secretary.
Since the initial interview, Mrs. Christ has partially shed the
emotional factors. Mostly she is apprehensive, short of sleep
and possessed little information that she could give. Christ did
not seem too interested in the operational aspect of the case, nor the
reasons for her husband's presence at the time of the trial, nor little
interest in the technical aspects. At the time of the trial, Mrs.
Christ was instructed not to seek interviews except with her family.
She has appeared to act extremely cautiously about her husband's
presence.
Mrs. Christ was informed that after the trial, the movements of
she and her husband in Havana were closely surveilled. The surveillance
had continued for some time after their arrival in the United States.
She was aware of contacts through Cuba to her husband prior to
the commencement of the operation. She also knew that her husband's
contacts were not necessarily limited to the Cuban authorities.
She was told that earlier, in May 1960, a Cuban national, carrying
the pseudonym of Dr. Colomer, visited Washington, D.C. At
the same time, Dr. Colomer left Havana with his wife in June 1961 and
has been brought to Washington, D.C.
Mrs. Christ also knows that Mr. Colomer left Havana with his wife
in June 1961 and has been brought to Washington, D.C. At the same
time the Department personnel has been told that another Cuban attorney
was hired by Dr. Colomer to represent the technicians and handle the case
in the event of his presence. It was not disclosed that Mrs. Christ was
acquainted with this attorney, Mr. Murphy, but she appears to be
acquainted with his name.
Mrs. Christ has learned from newspaper articles that there are
about 20 American plans of the type of those used with the
technicians are extremely poor. She also knows that food is brought
to the technicians by a Cuban national. She assumed the technicians have
been considerably well treated in the prison.
Mrs. Christ has been given the password used by the
technicians to obtain her husband's release. Mrs. Christ has only one
direct approach. She was told that the Cuban attorney
offered to arrange medical replies for the treatment of the three
technicians and that the offer was never acted upon by the Cubans.
She also knows that we have tried several other unsuccessful operations
but she is unaware of any details of these attempts. Mrs. Christ is
unaware of the operation now in progress, which contemplates utilizing
personnel in Havana. On several occasions she has considered a
different type of operation. For example, when Centro prepared exchanging
tractors for prisoners, Christ could only question as to what action was taken
to send the technicians in any exchange. She also had little idea as
to how this should be carried out. She was only told that the
negotiations would be clearly monitored and that there would be no
interference in behalf of her husband, unless the political climate was
such as the infliction of violence on her husband. Of course, there was at the same time, we are concerned
Mrs. Christ has been verbally apprised of the extent of the damage
we have endangered with the technicians and believes that the Agency has been
unable to visit them. She knows that over 1000 pieces were left by Dr. Colomer
with the Cubans and that this material is being completed through Dara.
She knows that the progress and that the dangers which came to the technicians
were not received by the CIA, and therefore, no further endangering
The operational details which have been discussed with Gen. Taylor,
but not with Mrs. Christ are of such a nature that little damage would
be done if they were inadvertently revealed to Mrs. Christ. The medical
prints which could not be discussed with her are
The name of the Washington attorney handling the case,
Details of present or future operations designed to
affect the release of the
