1000000
104-10301-10004
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
TOP SECRET
CIA Internal Use Only
Access Controlled by
CIA History Staff
TS#795052
Copy 1 of 2
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
CENTRAL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
OFFICIAL HISTORY
OF THE
BAY OF PIGS OPERATION
VOLUME III
EVOLUTION OF CIA'S
ANTI-CASTRO POLICIES,
1959-JANUARY 1961
(pages 1-203)
TOP SECRET
TS#795052
DCI-8
December 1979
Copy 1 of 2
PERMANENT HISTORICAL DOCUMENT
DO NOT DESTROY
13-00000
TOP SECRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL HISTORY
OF THE
BAY OF PIGS OPERATION
DCI-8
Volume III
EVOLUTION OF CIA'S
ANTI-CASTRO POLICIES,
1959-JANUARY 1961
Jack B. Pfeiffer
TOP SECRET
December 1979
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Foreword
This is the third volume of the Official History
of the Bay of Pigs Operation and it focuses on the
problems of establishing a policy for the United
States Government as Fidel Castro and his cohorts
came to power in Cuba.* The policy decided on by the
US Government in March 1960 called for the displace-
ment of Fidel Castro, and it was by no means a uni-
lateral decision promoted by the Central Intelligence
Agency -- although it is demonstrable that the Agency
was far more perceptive than the policy making bodies
in recognizing the threat to the Western Hemisphere
posed by Castro's communist affiliation. Because the
policy makers feared censure by the United Nations
and/or the Organization of American States, the myth
of "plausible deniability" was the caveat that deter-
mined the CIA would be the principal implementing arm for
the anti-Castro effort. From inception to termination,
* The preceding volumes were:
I -- Air Operations
II -- Participation in the Conduct of Foreign
Policy.
iii
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
"deniability" would be the albatross around the necks
of Agency planners; and from D-Day minus 2, (...
15 April 1961) it became the strangling cord insuring
the failure of the effort at the Bay of Pigs.
This volume describes the Agency's organization
designed to accomplish the assigned task; and it
records the interaction between the Agency and other
government components (State and the military in
particular), between the Agency and the White House,
and among various CIA components as the program
evolved. The relationships were sometimes less than
harmonious. Particular attention is focused on the
roles played by both President Eisenhower who author-
ized the anti-Castro program and Vice President Nixon
who has been charged time and again -- unjustifiably
as the record reveals -- with being the mastermind
behind the operation.
Emphasis also is focused on the drastic change
in the concept of the operation between the spring
and fall of 1960. From April's plans for the infil-
tration into Cuba of small teams of Agency trained
specialists in communications, sabotage, and para-
military operations to provide training and guidance
iv
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
to anti-Castro dissidents, November's plans called for
an amphibious landing with armor and combat air support
to establish a lodgement on Cuba soil from which a
provisional government (approved and sponsored by CIA)
could issue its clarion calls for US, UN, or OAS inter-
vention.
Encompassed in this volume are the records of
the policy level meetings which considered such items
as funding the operation, possible use of US personnel
in combat roles, the use of US bases for training or
for operations, types of direct action programs (e.g.,
propaganda drops vs sabotage), and the host of other
problems related to Castro's overthrow. It also makes
clear that various US corporate interests played an
active (sometimes overactive) role in support of the
anti-Castro efforts of the Government.
This volume also examines official records in
light of the allegations of the Senate Select Commit-
tee's investigations that the assassination plans being
developed by the Mafia were a fundamental part of the
official US Government program to overthrow Fidel
Castro. There is no basis in fact for this change.
v
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Finally, the reader of this volume should gain
some insights to the character of various of the
principal actors -- Agency and non-Agency -- who were
involved most closely with the Government's anti-Castro
policy during the period from its inception through
the close of the Eisenhower administration. Not all
of these impressions are flattering; but the author,
who was in no way associated with the operation or
the Directorate of Plans (now Operations), hopes that
the presentation of the evidence has been as free from
bias as possible.
Again the author wishes to acknowledge the valu-
able contributions of the other two members of the CIA
History Staff, Mrs. Eulalie Hammond and Mrs. Sharon
Bond, to the completion of this volume. Without their
unfailing willingness to perform either the substantive
research or the grimly mechanical tasks required in
preparing a volume such as this, the task could have
been interminable.
For any errors of fact or questionable interpreta-
tions, the author alone is responsible.
vi
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Volume III
Contents
Page
Foreword
iii
Part I.
Background
1
A.
Watching from the Sidelines
1
B. Castro Takes Over
17
Part II
Castro Must Go
32
A.
Organizing for Covert Action
32
B.
Forging the Tool
80
C.
Cooperation and Challenge
104
D.
Personnel and Training
126
Part III
Changing Concepts
143
Part IV
Presidential Resurgence
165
Part V
Direct Action Programs
204
A.
Propaganda
204
B.
Sabotage and other Exercises
233
Part VI
Mr. Nixon's Role
241
Part VII
The Question of Assassinations
277
Part VIII
Conclusions
290
Appendixes
A. Memorandum for the Director of Central
Intelligence from J. C. King, 11 Dec 59
296
vii
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Page
B. A Program of Covert Action Against
the Castro Regime, 16 Mar 60
300
C. CNO Correspondence with Department of State
and NSC:
1) Letter for Allen Dulles from
Arleigh Burke, 17 Mar 60
TS (DD/P 0-1436)
311
2) Letter for Gordon Gray from
Arleigh Burke, 16 Mar 60
313
3) Memorandum for the Special
Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs
from Haydn Williams, 16 Mar 60,
sub: US Policy toward Cuba
318
D. Memorandum for Assistant Deputy Director
(Plans) -- Action from J. D. Esterline,
2 May 60, sub: Liaison with US
Agencies on JMARC Activities
332
E. Attack on Petroleum Refinery at
Santiago de Cuba, 13-14 March 1961
335
F. Richard M. Nixon's Memorandum on Meeting
with Fidel Castro, 19 April 1959
337
G. Memorandum for DCI (for Briefing Vice
President Nixon), 29 Feb 60, sub:
What We Are Doing in Cuba
344
Source References
Part I
Background
347
Part II
Castro Must Go
352
Part III
Changing Concepts
366
Part IV
Presidential Resurgence
369
viii
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
Part V
Direct Action Programs
Page
374
Part VI
Mr. Nixon's Role
382
Part VII
Assassination
386
Part VIII Conclusions
388
ix
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
THE BAY OF PIGS OPERATION
Volume III Evolution of CIA'S
Anti-Castro Policies,
1950-January 1961
Part I
Background
A. Watching from the Sidelines
Fidel CASTRO RUZ was identified in one of the
earliest reports in Agency files as "one of the young,
'student leaders' in Cuba, who manages to get himself
involved in many things that do not concern him." 1/
Beginning in 1948, the activities of Fidel Castro came
to be of increasing concern to the Central Intelligence
Agency and to the United States Government (USG). By
early 1960 the USG officially adopted a covert action
program designed to remove the Castro government from
control of the island of Cuba. The policy of the USG
was to be carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency
and would culminate in the operations at the Bahia de
Cochinos from 17-19 April 1961.
Beginning in 1948 and continuing even after the
United States had formulated its official policy of
1
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
removing Castro from the leadership of the Cuban
Government, the principal questions faced by CIA's
Western Hemisphere Division, by the Department of
State, and by other concerned principals in the United
States were: What is Fidel Castro? By whom is he
controlled? What does he represent? Is he, or is he
not, a Communist? The nature of the Agency's interest
in answers to these questions is reflected in various
of the records for the period beginning in the mid-
1950's when it appeared that the Agency depended in
considerable part on the reporting from the American
Embassy offices in Havana.
Commenting on a report entitled "Antidemocratic
Antecedents and Activities of Fidel Castro" prepared
by President Batista's Military Intelligence Service
(SIM) -- apparently in response to a request from the
Buró de Represión a las Activadades Communistas (BRAC)*
-- to the Counselor of the American Embassy (Amembassy)
in Havana, Lincoln Vinton Chapin, told the CIA repre-
sentative among other things, that:
* Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities.
2
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
The SIM report is nothing more than
a summary of allegations and accusations
made against Fidel Castro during the
period 1948-1950. This summary has
apparently been slanted in an effort to
make Castro a "Rojo," but the result
is a rather poor one. 2/
The Department of State reporter refuted, on a
paragraph by paragraph basis, all of the allegations
which indicated that Castro had been tied in with
Communists, or Communist sympathizers, ever since
his university days; and in forwarding the report to
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division, the COS Havana
indicated that he was furnishing the information be-
cause of renewed interest by the State Department in
Fidel Castro. 3/
The tenor of State reporting continued in a
similar vein well into 1957. Charges that Castro
was a Communist could not be substantiated, but State
did note that in his student days, he was involved
in gangster-type activities. 4/ Havana Embassy
reporting also reflected another of the problems of
continuing concern to the US Intelligence Community --
would Castro have sufficient force to oust Batista,
and were his basic feelings toward the US friendly. 5/
3
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
In the mid-1950's, Havana Station ran seven
approved FI projects, most of which were aimed at
the Cuban Communist Party, the PSP (Partido Socialista
Popular). Agency funds also were used to support
the efforts of an anti-Communist organization engaged
principally in propaganda activities. 6/
Lyman Kirkpatrick, CIA's Inspector General,
apparently accompanied US Ambassador Gardner and
his party to a meeting with President Fulgencio
Batista in the summer of 1956, a meeting which prompted
the Cuban President to write to the DCI, Allen Dulles,
in praise of the meeting.* 7/ In fact, Agency support
for the peaceful transfer of power from Batista to a
democratically elected successor and amnesty for Castro
and his followers, as well as other anti-Batista dis-
sidents, was proposed in a memorandum from the Inspector
General in November 1957. 8/
* David R. McLean, a former member of the IG's In-
spection Staff, attached a cryptic note to the copy
of Dulles' letter of response to Batista, which he,
(McLean) included in the file of miscellaneous docu-
ments on the Bay of Pigs, which were inherited by the
present author. McLean suggested that Kirkpatrick
helped organize BRAC, but the present author has not
confirmed this story.
4
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
In view of subsequent developments, one inter-
esting suggestion made by the Inspector General in
November 1957 was the following:
On the island of Cuba, probably only
a US citizen, in some way known to be
connected with the US Government and
"assumed" to be backed by Washington,
would have the ability to act as inter-
mediary between the various opposition
groups in the Batista Government and
work out a possible "cease fire." This
would have to be done covertly, and any
results achieved either not ever publicly
announced or certainly not advertised
until after the election. Any public
attempt to bring peace would be fore-
doomed to failure by each side probably
indicating exorbitant demands and then
being unable to withdraw from its
announced position.* 9/
Although it may have had no relation to the
Kirkpatrick memorandum, on 25 November 1957, less
than a week following the Kirkpatrick memorandum,
William Wieland of the Department of State notified
Adolf Rerle, one of the country's leading experts on
Latin American Affairs and a former member of the
* It is interesting to speculate whether at this
time Kirkpatrick was thinking of William D. Pawley,
former US Ambassador to Brazil and Peru and an
American businessman who operated significant enter-
prises in Cuba, to negotiate with Batista. Within
a year's time, Pawley, who also stood high in the
ranks of the Republic Party contributors, was desig-
nated to undertake such a mission to Cuba.
5
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
State Department, that he was enroute to Cuba, ac-
cording to Berle, "to see whether anything can be
done to bring the Cuban revolt to any kind of an
orderly conclusion." 10/
Berle, with remarkable prescience, noted:
It is rough going, anti-intervention is
all right up to a point. But we are re-
sponsible for keeping order in the hemis-
phere quite aside from the proprieties, and
a rather bolder policy in that regard
seems indicated. 11/
By early 1958, the Agency had become sufficiently
concerned about the pro-Communist orientation of
Castro's government, and particularly the pro-Castro
proclivities of his two principal deputies, Ernesto
Che Guevara and Raul Castro Ruz, Fidel's brother, that
penetration of the Partido Socialista Popular was a
priority concern of the field. At least two agents
were successfully placed in PSP ranks, and in March
1958, one Agency officer managed to join the Castro
forces in the mountains for a period of two weeks and
to observe their tactics in combat. In June 1958,
Robert D. Wiecha, COB, Santiago de Cuba, got himself
"captured" by Raul Castro's forces in order to be
able to assist 29 US sailors and marines and 15 US
6
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
businessmen who had been kidnapped by Raul Castro.
In both instances, the Agency representatives returned
unharmed; and both reported on the "radical" and anti-
American nature of the Castro movement. According
to one source, Wiecha found "definite communist over-
tones" among the Raul Castro forces.* 12/
Additional documentation of the pro-communist
nature of the Castro organization was reported with
great frequency during 1958 from contacts the Santiago
de Cuba Base had in Oriente Province. Whether Castro's
contingent was communist oriented or not, others such
as Adolf Berle and his friends (both in and out of
State Department), continued to reflect their concern
about the possible ways to combat the growing strength
of the Castro movement in Cuba. 13/ Berle was most
hopeful that the Castro situation could be remedied
by cooperation among Latin American liberals working
in conjunction with some of the more enlightened Cubans
who had broken with Castro (for example, Felipe Pazos
and Pepín Bosch) with additional support from the OAS
* The historian for WH Division provided the figures
on US captives shown here, but Hugh Thomas indicates
19 US businessmen and 27 servicemen were captured.
7
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
and only minor participation from the US Department
of State. 14/
At a time when the Agency's fears about the
Castro movement were increasing, a rather different
proposal was put forward by the Chief of the Para-
military Division, Political and Psychological Staff,
of the Clandestine Service. Rather than trying to
whip Castro, Alfred Cox suggested that perhaps the
wisest move for the Agency would be to join Castro.
It was apparent, according to Cox, that since Batista
was on the way out, we should now try to remedy Castro's
hostile attitude toward the United States because of
our efforts to prop up Batista. To accomplish this,
Cox suggested that:
A practical way to protect United
States interests in this matter would
be to make secret contact with Castro,
assure him of the United States sympa-
thy with some of his objectives, and
to offer him support. The individual
chosen to make the contact should be
of such background that it is clear
that he speaks with the authority of
the United States Government.
Obviously, the support must be given
covertly so as not to endanger United
States relations with Batista. The most
effective means of help to Castro would
be arms and ammunition. Air dropping of
8
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
this equipment might be dangerous from
the security aspect. Allowing a ship-
load of equipment manned by a Cuban
crew to evade our Coast Guard would
probably be a better method. The most
secure means of help would be giving
the money to Castro, who could then
purchase his own arms. A combination
of arms and money would probably be
best.* 15/
By late fall of 1958, when it became apparent
that the Batista regime in Cuba was about to go under,
the Agency in conjunction with the Department of State
supported a plan to have Batista bow out more or less
gracefully and to have the government of the country
taken over, not by the Presidential candidate who had
been elected in the rigged election, but by a junta
pending subsequent free, democratic elections. When
* Not all Agency reporting out of the Cuban area was
biased against Castro. One report in the fall of 1958
indicated that Castro definitely was not a Communist,
citing as a reason for this: "Ninety-five percent of
his followers are good Catholics. Three Catholic
priests have joined Fidel Castro and his forces in
the Sierra Maestra, and one has joined Raul Castro
and his troops in the Sierra Cristal. The rebel forces
under the Castros, therefore, have four chaplains,
while the entire Cuban Army does not have a single
chaplain. (Source comment: The United States should
not be taken in by President Fulgencio Batista's attempt
to label the revolutionary movement as Communist in-
spired, dominated, or influenced.)" 16/
The source for this evaluation of Castro was, as
one might surmise, a Catholic priest.
9
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
traveling to Miami with William Snow, an Assistant
Secretary of State, and Henry Holland, formerly a
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Col. J. C. King,
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division, met with William
D. Pawley on 18-19 November 1958 to discuss a plan
which would have Pawley travel to Cuba to meet with
Batista in an attempt to convince him to bow out
gracefully. Pawley was a long-time acquaintance and
friend of Batista from the days when Pawley had been
running the Cubana Airline.
In return for Batista's support for a friendly
military junta -- nominally to be responsible for his
ouster -- the representatives of the Department of
State and the Agency agreed that Batista should be
provided safety for himself, his friends, and his
close cronies, particularly those whose lives would
be endangered should there ever be a truly violent
overthrow of the government. Batista also was to be
provided protection for his personal assets in Cuba.
Various individuals were identified as possible candi-
dates for the junta, and, according to King, the
objective was that various of these members would have
10
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
sufficient political strength to weaken Castro's sup-
port.
Following the meeting in Miami, Pawley did
undertake the mission to see Batista in Cuba. Arriv-
ing on 8 December in Havana he had a series of pre-
liminary meetings with the Cuban Foreign Minister,
who strongly supported the proposals that Pawley
indicated that he was going to make. Unfortunately,
however, the Foreign Minister told Pawley that it was
unlikely that Batista would accept the proposals.
The meeting between Pawley and Batista actually took
place on ll December 1958 when, according to the re-
port from Havana station:
Pawley met with Batista for two hours
this evening. Laid his plan before
Batista without pulling any punches.
Batista took it calmly. He agreed with
much of Pawley's analysis of situation,
but said he could not take the junta
way out. 17/
Batista made no promises, and went through the
reasons why he couldn't possibly give up the office
for fear of being called a coward and traitor; that
there would be a blood bath; and that he had both
moral and constitutional obligations. COS Havana
11
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
noted Pawley's evaluation of the meeting as follows:
Batista will not accept plan, and will
make every effort turn government over to
Rivera Aguero (the Batista candidate who
had been named Presidential successor in
a rigged election). However, unfavorable
developments may produce change of attitude
on part of Batista]. 18/
Following Pawley's visit with Batista, the situ-
ation in Cuba deteriorated rapidly and the policies of
the US Government regarding Cuba were ambivalent. A
representative of the Archbishop of Havana, Father Bez
Chebebe, approached the American Consul in Santiago to
float some proposals for resolving the differences be-
tween the two countries. The priest emphasized that
although a Castro take over was inevitable:
Both Fidel Castro and US interests
had important stake in sugar crop and
both undoubtedly wish resolve problems
caused by present situation. Also said
that there were matters now mostly minor
on both sides which have been sources
mutual irritation and misunderstanding
and that these should be eliminated
soonest, so that they would not grow
to affect future relations, which Father
considers inevitable. 19/
In addition, the representative of the Archbishop of
Havana indicated to the Amconsul that:
He thought(t) US Government could
profitably send person of confidence,
12
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
not necessarily an official, to discuss
mutual problems as discreetly as possi-
ble with Fidel. Implied that such would
be well received. 20/
Despite the fact that the communist proclivities
of Fidel Castro and his cohorts had been clearly stated
by Agency personnel in Cuba, on 18 December 1958, COS
Havana cabled Headquarters strongly supporting the
position that the Archbishop of Havana's representative
had proposed to the American Consulate, saying:
Havana Station feels proposal merits
serious State/CIA consideration. Opera-
tion this nature could pay big future
dividends if fully qualified person could
be found for job and dispatched quickly.
Regardless how we may feel about Castro
and his movement, both will be important
political forces for a long time to come.
Perhaps candidate could be found through
National Catholic Welfare Organization. 21/
At about the same time this proposal was being
put forward, WH Division had asked the Paramilitary
Division (PMD) to establish a small contingency task
force, capable of making air drops into Cuba. Two
representatives of PMD, Lucious L. Rucker and William
G. Redel were sent to Havana -- Rucker to locate and
survey possible drop zones and Redel to get himself
into position to see if he could locate dissidents who
13
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
were both anti-Castro and anti-Batista. What WH hoped
to accomplish, presumably, was that they could organize
these anti-Batista and anti-Castro dissidents and get
them armed in time so that they could prevent Castro
from taking over the government if Batista should
suddenly resign or decide to flee the country. 22/
On 31 December 1958, Paramilitary Division reported
to WH Division that a Helio Courier was already in
place in Key West with a backup Helio in Washington;
a sterile C-54 had been requested from Europe; and
the Office of Logistics would have an arms load
rigged for a drop by 2 January 1959. 23/
It was not until the last week of December 1958
that President Eisenhower became actively involved in
discussions and decisions affecting US policy toward
Cuba. His interest was precipitated by a 23 December
1958 Memorandum on Cuba which had been prepared by
the Acting Secretary of State and sent to Eisenhower's
National Security Adviser, Gordon Gray, who discussed
the memorandum with Eisenhower and the DCI on 26 Decem-
ber. The President apparently indicated that he had
not been fully aware of the positions of State and CIA
14
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
regarding Castro, and he suggested that meetings of
the Special Group under NSC 5412/2 should be held on
a weekly basis, with Cuba to be a regular subject
for discussion.
Gordon Gray and Allen Dulles had some differences
of opinion concerning the advisability of reading other
individuals into the act. Gray suggested that the
President's Board of Consultants (later the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board) be made party to
the discussions, but Dulles rather strongly suggested
that there was a significant difference between the
discussions which were intended for the Special Group
5412 on Covert Operations, and PFIAB responsibilities
for general problems related to foreign intelligence.
Dulles made the specific point that if the Board of
Consultants was going to get involved in the details
of planned covert operations, they were then in a
position of reviewing US foreign policy. The discus-
sion also seems to have verged on the right of Congress
to attempt to oversee covert operations -- a point
about which Eisenhower expressed himself very strongly,
noting that such action by Congress would be an in-
fringement of his prerogative as Commander-in-Chief. 24/
15
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
At 3:40 on the afternoon of 31 December 1958,
there was another high level meeting attended by
Messrs. Herter, Murphy, and Rubottom, Department of
State; Irwin, Department of Defense; Admiral Burke,
the CNO; General Cabell, DDCI; and Gordon Gray at
which the Cuban situation was again discussed. Even
as the meeting was in progress, Batista was preparing
to flee Cuba; and possible US action, including direct
intervention by US Marines, was among the topics that
were discussed. There also was some suggestion that
the US take the responsibility for naming members to
a junta to succeed Batista, rather than permitting
Fidel Castro and his followers to take over the Cuban
Government. 25/
With some benefit of hindsight, Eisenhower re-
called this period in the following manner:
During the rush of these last events
in the final days of 1958, the Central
Intelligence Agency suggested for the
first time that a Castro victory might
not be in the best interests of the United
States. (Earlier reports which I had re-
ceived of Castro's possible Communism were
suspect because they originated with
people who favored Batista.)
"Communists and other extreme radicals
appear to have penetrated the Castro move-
ment," Allen Dulles said. "If Castro
16
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
takes over, they will probably participate
in the government." When I heard this
estimate, I was provoked that such a con-
clusion had not been given earlier.
At another point, the ex-President wrote:
Though our intelligence experts backed
and filled for a number of months, events
were gradually driving them to the conclu-
sion that with the coming of Castro, Com-
munism had penetrated this hemisphere. 26/
B. Castro Takes Over
During the first few weeks of 1959 following
Castro's take over, there was a flurry of activity
as Havana Station attempted to keep track of the
changes in government. The Station seemed assured
that it was cognizant of all of Castro's movements,
especially on the developing military capabilities.
In fact, when the US Army suggested that the Station
provide support for the Army's covert collection of
military intelligence under commercial cover in Havana,
COS took strong exception to the proposals, emphasizing
the Station's own capabilities in this area. COS was
overruled by Headquarters, however, and General Cabell
assured the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
of the Army that while he was aware that Havana had
17
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
objected to the Army's proposals, the COS nonetheless
had been "instructed" to cooperate.* 27/
In these early weeks of 1959, US representatives
in Havana were predicting that Castro would have a
difficult time holding his government together, and
among other things, one report emphasized the proba-
bility that Castro would soon find that he would have
to get along with the United States. 29/ The most
likely threat to relations with the United States
was the existence of the naval base at Guantanamo
Bay, but neither CIA nor State Department representa-
tives saw any threat to this installation, and this
belief was supported in early March 1959 by a Special
National Intelligence Estimate that, at most, Castro
"sooner or later (is) likely to ask for major increases
* An interesting side note to the discussions at this
time was that the Army Attache apparently had planned
to use a negro Lt. Col. who was on TDY in Havana to do
a study of the new Castro Army. In a memorandum to
the Chief, Western Hemisphere Division, and to the
Chief, Foreign Intelligence Staff, Al Cox, Chief,
Paramilitary Division reported -- without ever using
the term "black" -- that General Erskine (Army Special
Forces) believed that a "color bar" did exist in the
Caribbean area and that a better choice than Lt. Col.
Reuben Horner, the black officer in question, could
be made. 28/
18
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
in the nominal rent now paid for the Guantanamo Base,
revision of employment practices which appeared to
discriminate against Cuban workers, and perhaps other
changes." 30/
In the early spring of 1959, as Castro made
known that he was planning to visit the United States,
COS Havana revealed ambiguous feelings about the im-
portance of the Castro trip. He noted for Headquarters
information that:
Washington visit can make or break
Castro. Unless he gets a strong helping
hand from the United States, many serious
observers feel his regime will collapse
within a matter of months. 31/
Pointing to the serious economic difficulties of the
new Cuban Government, COS Havana indicated that
Castro's popularity was very low among the middle and
upper classes, but at the same time he emphasized that
Castro was "the idol of the masses." 32/ COS Havana
did an excellent job of predicting how Castro would
act when he arrived in the United States, suggesting
that Castro would probably make his pitch, not to the
heads of the State Department and to the press, but
that he would appeal to the workers, the farmers, the
19
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
students, and the masses in America to support his
revolution. COS emphasized that Headquarters should
make no mistake that the Castro Government, while not
openly avowed Communist, was heavily infiltrated with
Communists and had taken no stand in opposition to
Communist positions, and, moreover, there was little
question about who would eventually control the Cuban
Government. COS did suggest that Headquarters give
serious consideration to planting embarrassing ques-
tions with reporters to stick to Castro while he was
in the US. 33/ Both the Department of State and COS
Havana were in general agreement about the results of
the Castro visit. COS Havana summarized one of his
dispatches as follows:
It would be unwise to assume from the
minor indications to date that Fidel has
undergone a serious change of heart as a
result of his visit to the United States. 34/
In a memorandum to Gordon Gray, President Eisen-
hower's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs,
Robert Murphy, Deputy Undersecretary of State noted
that:
Despite Castro's apparent simplicity,
sincerity, and eagerness to reassure the
United States public, there is little
20
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
probability that Castro had altered the
essentially radical course of his revolu-
tion. From his experience here, he has
gained a valuable knowledge of American
public reaction which may make him a more
difficult man to deal with on his return
to Cuba. It would be a serious mistake
to underestimate this man. With all his
appearance of naiveté, unsophistication,
and ignorance on many matters, he is clearly
a strong personality and a born leader of
great personal courage and conviction.
While we certainly know him better than
before, Castro remains an enigma; and we
should await his decisions on specific
matters before assuming a more optimistic
view than heretofore about the possibility
of developing a constructive relationship
with him and his government. 35/
With the benefit of hindsight, it seems that in
this period shortly following Castro's visit to the
United States the COS Havana may have misjudged a
significant development which surfaced almost imme-
diately after Castro's return to Cuba. Remarking on
an apparent rash of anti-Communist statements appear-
ing in the Cuban press, one dispatch speculated that:
These demonstrations obviously welcome,
but possibly most significant aspect is
demonstration once again, enormous power
Castro, who with few words made anti-
Communism popular position. By same
token he could reverse trend at any time,
and skeptics speculating that current
stand is sop intended to make it more
difficult for U.S. interests to protest
effectively against stringent agrarian
reform law. 36/
21
TOP SECRET
13-00000
TOP SECRET
cited above provided a more accurate insight as to
the depth of the struggle which was, in fact, being
waged within Cuba between the pro- and the anti-
Communist factions. Reporting on comments made by
the Executive Secretary of the Partido Socialista
