14-00000
104-10187-10103
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
MEMORANDUM
WH/S #64-749
13 October 1984
SUBJECT: Operation
CUBAN DEFECTOR
Briefing in Guatemala of (Chief of State Peralta)
1. The briefing was held in a small luxurious
government conference room on the afternoon of Friday
October 1964, lasting about 2 1/2 hours. (Chief of State
Colonel Peralta, Minister of Government Colonel Serrano
and Intelligence Chief Colonel Porres attended for the Guate-
malar. TWO CIA OFFICERS WERE PRESENT
2. At the request of the SENIOR CIA OFFICER
I prefaced the operational briefing with a brief description
of how the U. S. Intelligence community operates, of the
role of CIA, of the need for compartmentation and security,
and specifically of how the foregoing considerations make
it imperative for the Guatemalans) to adopt security pre-
cautions which will ensure that the information we provide
and the joint operations we undertake are compartmented
within the Guatemalan government (and, in fact, discussed
by the Guatemalan government exclusively with our re-
presentatives in the field.)
3. Following the introductory remarks outlined
above, I briefed the group on the DGI structure, the PGI
operational techniques, and specifically on DGI aims and
operations in Guatemala. The (President) lent close attention
throughout the briefing and examined the exhibits closely,
including the DGI intelligence requirements for Guatemala)
and the (Salvadoran "Caso Zapoto" file.)
4. After the foregoing exposition, I explained
our aims in exploiting the information. In this connection, I
asked for close cooperation and coordination of activities,
promising that we shall do our utmost and making reference to
our travel lists and watch list.
-3-
h. The effectiveness of his own actions against
guerrillas in Guatemala) and his determination
to meet violence with violence;
i. Recognition of the importance of the information
covered in the briefing and of its exploitation;
j. Reference to the case of the (Mexican courier)
working for (Cuban intelligence) and now detained;
k. Acceptance of security restrictions and his
decision to limit the information to those present.
7. In replying to the remarks of Colonel Peralta,
I said that we appreciate the cooperation of Guatemala in the
OAS and that we shall be most interested in the exploitation
of the possibilities in the present case. I added that the matter
of using force against Cuba is a policy matter on which I was
not competent to comment but that the decisions made by the
United States Government are based on careful study of
detailed information including information on Soviet intentions
and capabilities.
8. At the conclusion of the meeting, (Peralta)
asked for a copy of the (requirements) (which he already
had gone over closely) and took the copy with him to study
further.
4/
5. With reference to the case, because
of the developments and plans in Salvador, I explained
briefly the status of the (GALTON) card and the possibility
of his being transferred to Guatemala. (This was in line
with the discussions in El Salvador which included calls on
the (President) and the President's intelligence
advisor, Colonel MEDRAN.) I added that the Guatemalan
government would take no action unless requested by President
RIVERA or Colonel MEDRAN. If (GALTON)
is transferred, one of our people probably would talk to
(GALTON) in (Guatemala).
6. The Chief of State (Peralta) made a rather
impassioned speech in which he covered the following points:
a. His own long experience in the OAS, in Cuba
and in Central America;
b. His early warnings about Castro--which
were disregarded;
c. The extent to which Guatemala has lived up
to its obligations in the OAS; to which it has
cooperated in efforts against Castro; and to
which it has looked toward U.S. leadership;
d. The failure of the U.S. to take aggressive
action against Cuba and the need for taking a
hard line, including the use of force in support of
military activity by the free Cubans and the other
American countries;
e. His appreciation that the Soviets will not be
willing to risk a nuclear war over Cuba;
f. Condemnation of Mexico for her dealings with
Cuba, for failure to abide by her obligations in
the OAS, and for permitting the Castroites to
operate out of Mexico against other American
countries;
g. The need for action against Mexico;
SECRET

