14-00000
104-10232-10018
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
1
20 October 161
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Peeting with Dr. Kiro in New York City on
October 16, 1.61
The recting with Dr. Miro on October 16 wa peatnuoned from 10:00
until such tipe as his audience ton inated with Cantinal Sellran. He
arrived at my roor at about 10:50. He declared that the Cardinal had
wept when he learned the details of the suffering of the Cubans at the
hamia of Castros declared that the Archulahop of diari vaan't doing
enough for the Cuban refugeest that the U.S. waan't doing enough for
thens that Castro Fust bo overthrown. Firo told the Cardinal that in
all Latin America there were going to to ormnized acts of syrpathy
for the Cuban sufferers. The Cardinal said he would say a Hass for
thes on October 17. He invited tiro to coe lin at any tire.
Miro answered sy query as to the Laceria atmirs by stating that
it was very successful; 2,800 people were inside the auditorium and
another 1,000 peole outsides that Lacerda had received such applause.
The Inter-Arerican Press Association affairs also had given an
opportunity to present the Cuban tragedy. He said that the (Firo) had
told how Fidel had shot 31 people in September alone, and other detalles
had described how Communist: vas gaining ground day by days that in
Cuba they have installed a powerful radio station broadcasting to Latin
Arerica; that ten countrica have broken with Cuba, but Argentina has
not; that everybody is confused.
He informed se that ne for the documents relating to the Cuban
plots in Argentina, the Argentine rilitary ren care to talk to Varons,
and he gave then sone doourents that have no lavortance. The officers
told Verona textually "We have no confidence in the Argentine Foreign
Office," nevertheless, when they arrived there, they turned over the
docurents to the Foreign Office. But these docurents had no importances
they were perely to coronstrate that there had been an extradition of
documents, an' that they were originals. The in rortant dccurents are
held by Varona in Miami,
Miro said they also visualized another act involving Lacerda in
Piani, but that his "adt inistrative" budget really does not provide for
props arda activities (such as the Current SP and Laceria affairs). I
countered that it was considered that his budget was sufficient for his.
to conduct sore propaganda activities; obviously nothing on a major
scale - but some things.
i
:
ST
14-00000
-2-
Viro declared that internal propaganda and clandestine: action in
Cuba could not be delayed any longer. I agreed on the necessity, and
that it was believed that reasures are recessary to forvent in Cuba
the opposition to Castro. "The people are against himi" declared Viro.
"But Increase it," I answered. Piro Was stated "If this action doesn't
ster. from the Consejo (CRC) - not as an Independent agency, but in
close contact with you (the Agency), - what we forrent is a complete
disorder in Cuba, and afterwards no governant can succeed; secondly,
if we do not have a central plan, and carry it out vell in a core or
less lirited period of time, there will rerely to more shooting of
people (prisoners) by Fidel."
"Ard this is my insistence. Eow I ar afraid to go to Plazi. What
an I to tell the people there? What do 107 Converse? Meanwhile the
Agency keeps on infiltrating people into Cute but disconnected frot the
Council. I was told in ry conversation with the President to amplify
the sentership in the Consejo. I have endeavored to do that. In the
Council there are other great organizations - dolegates from each of the
organizations that ask me for arus, cyrazito, things, and I as here
powerless. Therefore I rust work with you people in order to see hov
we kay hard over arms and a plan of action so they ray see that this is
not merely an endloss series of natotare actions." I replied, "ell, I
believe that a well-worked-out plan that shova good chances of success
will te favorably considered."
"How about arms for the Escamtrey?" asked Miro. I replied that
it was 27 understanding that arms for że Escambrey could only be
landed on the North Coast, how then would they get to the Escar brey?
Miro said that the boat which had rand zany trips (working for YOU),
would have to establish communication and find out when they would pick
up the arra; what cannot be done is abarrion Osvaldo Ramirez in his
situation of anguish because he is the only real regional focus of
resistance that there is there, and he has teen really left in a desperate
situation for three months.
I interposed that there seered acce question about the paper from
Ramirez asking for arms, whether it was the real thing. "Perfectly
identified replied Piro, "he assured that it is perfectly identified and
requests have come to me through different channels asking for these arms.
I am still waiting now for a month and a half. All you have to do is tell
us the reans of delivery, the people ic contact and then deliver to our
Cutans the arms, dynatite, fuses. I az still waiting, and criticism (of
Cubans against inaction) increases daily."
"All the delegations of revolutictary groups in the Council sak re
for ares and reans for fighting. but I cannot provide then anything.
Keantile the Agency is infiltrating reopie into Cuba without counting on
the Corsejo for anything. This puts it into an absurd position - kerely
a "courcil painted on the wall. I have said, "look for someone else if I
am not considered able to do the job but we rust work. I have confidence
in the Agency, but I cannot work in this fashion."
SOT
14-00000
SEOCET
-3-
-
"I've asked for money for the clandestine groups. What have they said
about that?" Miro asked, I replied that there is a problem of the means of
delivery, that the Italian & bassy at present appears undesirable. The
Ambassador isn't there. Well, we look for another reans; the Argentine
anything - those peonle need toney" he countered. I have to carry out con-
crete things," he declared. "I'r now like a person in a swinning pool
without water." "For three and a half months I've struggled to maintain a
revolutionary spirit. My rilitary veople are waiting till I arrived and
tell then, this must be done, that must be done. Nothing yet! And without
any plan, I don't go anywhere; nowhere!
"The other time I went with my eyes closed, through faith. We had a
fallure and the failure fell upon re. I cannot proceed under such circum-
stances in no way. I've asked for $50,000 to send in to the underground.
The Russians are spending $400,000 in propaganda and have less than the
U.S. We shall not compromise the U.S. Tell me the way to send it in. The
Council is to aid them, not merely to conduct reetings."
"On that request they haven't replied anything?" he asked, I answered
that on this iter, I had made known Miro's desire, but that so far nothing
had been resolved.
"I'm not corplaining," he stated, "but for three ronths I have been
asking for a cor.act with the authority to resolve. Why? Because I'm
getting nowhere. when I return now I shall be asked, "How about it?" and
must answer, 'You will have to wait because I have nothing. And meanwhile
the Agency keeps on infiltrating people into Cuba independent of the
Consejo. Let us go back. Without being in agreement, I cannot serve you.
I have no interest in presiding over a Council that is of no use."
I pointed out that the Council must continue to exist, with him as
its president, as the coordinating body of the resistance rovement, but
that there are certain difficulties in putting the student or labor activi-
ties under the direction of the Council; that these groups are now functioning
efficiently and that I trusted that he could see the problems of completely
changing their control, direction, and coordination. I added that I
believed that he should know something of what they are doing and that I
believed that should be kept informed.
"I know absolutely nothing," he replied. "What cores to me is from
these same individuals. I am not in agreement with that, I'm becoming ridi-
culous. Under these circumstances I cannot continus. I have planted the
probler of the underground, the problem of the collateral organizations
(that he would like to have in Council by being their source of support
and coordination), of the ragistrates, and now you have seen what ALABAU has
done (proclaiming GARCERAN as president of exile government), who is work-
ing with you people, and you have seen the reaction of the State Department.
Now yosterday ALABAU is publishing political denunciations against the
Council. I have discussed the matter of the agistrates with the C.I.A., I
don't remember the name of the person. A month has passed and the other
magistrates (those with ALABAU) haven't been stopped (in their activities)
and they haven't had elections as I requested to select another leader,"
SEGUET
14-00000
-4-
"The students are continuing their activities. I believe that I have
something in my head as a tesis for the determination of what should be
discussed in the Council vite te; and in agreerent with you; but these
existing circumstances, without any connection, sake it so that I cannot
continue the clandestine aid. To the first probler, I presented your reply,
"We shall se." To the second probler, the collateral organizations -
which continues the same as refore, the third problem I presented, on arus
to send in, nothing. The fourth problem, the propaganca operation "Grieta"
that I shoved you, nothing." I replied that on the latter I had discussed
the batter, that it was, I believen, a suggestion given to him in the Depart-
rent of Stató.
"If we don't take propaganda and send arra into Cuba now, it's useless,"
he declared. "And I cannot rezsin in silence." I renlied that I believed
quite a bit of propaganda vas being conducted. "Yes, but independent of the
Council. I CANNOT EK A P72271 "They (the Agency) keep on dealing with the
MRP, with the Unidad Revoluciorario, and they haven't entered into the Council
alonly because they are in cirect contact with the Agency. Thus it appears
that none of the orcules et I took up with you some twenty daya ago have
been resolved, and I'll have take another solution. I want to know the truth
if I'm not acceptable. I'll leave and without any scandle hatsoever. I have
avalloved all the criticism, in ry own house, in silence, as though I were
responsible for everything, I cannot continue to do this and be doing nothing.
I cannot be a pumpet! I have no arms to give."
He reiterated that nothing had been resolved on any of his requests and
procesals, and that he couldn't continue thus. That he could quit, go to
Puerto Rico as a professor. Be added he would want to work with us. He then
referred to the acts of Lacerda in New York, which had cost four thousand
dollars, plus passare, a ricicicus sur spend from the ministrative Budget.
"We have paid the passage, his living costs bere," he said.
"Now I go to Piaci where I have to face the organizations grouped into
the Council. "Aita for evertere?" "I haven't any. All the organizations free-
wheeling there which don't want to join together because they are working
directly with your people." I said this was unfortunate and asked whether
there could not be sore forme realizin. contacta with ther without noces-
sarily channelising their sport and direction through the Council, such
as by forming a comittee along the lines I had suggested in Piani.
Miro then referred to the spreement reached in the white House meeting
with Fr. Goodvin, Mr. Woodvent, with wentlemen of the C.ILA., and with Fr.
Hurvits. First, That he caly thing that is reconized is the Consejo (CRC);
Dr. liro is the person of our corfidence and will have an adrinistrative
budget which he will control and will report later the excenses of coordina-
tion, su: that any other excenses, cropaganda er clandestine activity, will be
paid by the Avency; for the pretiers of the organizations in the Council there
vill be a contact to assist in working out their solutions; that is to say,
that their protleta of boats an arms." Another point was that in case there
are organizations that de act choose to join the Courcil, Dr. Hiro will be
perfectly informed in actance of the ratters at hand and will give his
authorisation. That is to say, it establishes a unifying control over the
(CRC). I have seven, to work with you, with me, with the people who are
going to carry out the activities, with the people that I designate.
Nothing of that is being done. Then what they want is to work alone."
"I will not continue. I will not continue from the time I return to
Miami. I have gone on for five months, struggling. I cannot accept this
situation. I have tried to pull together those groups as asked in the
White House. I haven't succeeded in crouping any rore, because I want to
speak clearly in order to remain good friends alsays - because you have
prevented it. The students haven't joined, not because of no political
reason, but perely because you support thes: directly. Presumably the idea
is that in this way the security of this nation is better safeguarded.
A Consejo was desired to serve as the coordinating group and to provide a
reans by which the United States would not appear to to intervening in Cuba.
If there is to be a Consejo, it must have all the dignity of a Council."
"When I try to form a Council, grouping all elements together, they
don't join because they are talking directly with your people - and there
is an office for that purpose in Fiami - which deals with all the ren who
want to work, who want to do things. This is all indecendent of the Council.
And some work for a destruction of the Council. I cannot tolerate this. I
have a son who is a prisoner; either I know the plans, and I knew the saneuver
and the problems that they are going to carry out, or I, when I arrive in
Miami, will say, "No," and send word to washington. Let them do without me.
There will be someone who will submit to these things, but not I."
"And of the four items that remedy-promised me to resolve, there
-have not been resolved any, and I find eyself in the dark. And I as very
sorry. I am not going to comprcrise the security of this Nation, but
neither ar I going to compromise the situation of these boys, when they
disappeared, lost their lives, etc., I was confronted with "And you are the
president of the Council." I cannot remaine in this way.."
"I haven't been able to group together anything. I was promised that
the magistrates would all incorcorate together (into the Council), but
that rascal ALALAU is working against the Council and I have reason to
believe that he is doing it with Agency support, otherwise how would he pay
for his politicsl denunciations." I responded, that I believed this could
not be true. He shouted, "I have expressed my position te you, and I want
you to get an answer when you can. If these problems that I have set forth
do not have an irmediate solution, I a not to know and to dispose of
relative actions to be taken, then how, in view of my situation, must I do."
He asked about the plan for clandestine sabotage action by corrando
raid, that he had given us, and what had core of it. I replied that he rust
realize that the study of such a plan necessarily was slow and must be
considered by rany. He said he was convinced that there was no intention of
accepting such plans, and that while now we discuss such plans, we lose out.
"I cannot accept this situation, nor would you."
14-00000
SEOCET
-5-
"I've asked for money for the clandestine groups. What have they said
about that?" Miro asked, I replied that there is a problem of the means of
delivery, that the Italian & bassy at present appears undesirable. The
Ambassador isn't there. Well, we look for another reans; the Argentine
anything - those peonle need toney" he countered. I have to carry out con-
crete things," he declared. "I'r now like a person in a swinning pool
without water." "For three and a half months I've struggled to maintain a
revolutionary spirit. My rilitary veople are waiting till I arrived and
tell then, this must be done, that must be done. Nothing yet! And without
any plan, I don't go anywhere; nowhere!
"The other time I went with my eyes closed, through faith. We had a
fallure and the failure fell upon re. I cannot proceed under such circum-
stances in no way. I've asked for $50,000 to send in to the underground.
The Russians are spending $400,000 in propaganda and have less than the
U.S. We shall not compromise the U.S. Tell me the way to send it in. The
Council is to aid them, not merely to conduct reetings."
"On that request they haven't replied anything?" he asked, I answered
that on this iter, I had made known Miro's desire, but that so far nothing
had been resolved.
"I'm not corplaining," he stated, "but for three ronths I have been
asking for a cor.act with the authority to resolve. Why? Because I'm
getting nowhere. when I return now I shall be asked, "How about it?" and
must answer, 'You will have to wait because I have nothing. And meanwhile
the Agency keeps on infiltrating people into Cuba independent of the
Consejo. Let us go back. Without being in agreement, I cannot serve you.
I have no interest in presiding over a Council that is of no use."
I pointed out that the Council must continue to exist, with him as
its president, as the coordinating body of the resistance rovement, but
that there are certain difficulties in putting the student or labor activi-
ties under the direction of the Council; that these groups are now functioning
efficiently and that I trusted that he could see the problems of completely
changing their control, direction, and coordination. I added that I
believed that he should know something of what they are doing and that I
believed that should be kept informed.
"I know absolutely nothing," he replied. "What cores to me is from
these same individuals. I am not in agreement with that, I'm becoming ridi-
culous. Under these circumstances I cannot continus. I have planted the
probler of the underground, the problem of the collateral organizations
(that he would like to have in Council by being their source of support
and coordination), of the ragistrates, and now you have seen what ALABAU has
done (proclaiming GARCERAN as president of exile government), who is work-
ing with you people, and you have seen the reaction of the State Department.
Now yosterday ALABAU is publishing political denunciations against the
Council. I have discussed the matter of the agistrates with the C.I.A., I
don't remember the name of the person. A month has passed and the other
magistrates (those with ALABAU) haven't been stopped (in their activities)
and they haven't had elections as I requested to select another leader,"
SEGUET
14-00000
-6-
:
!
:
:
He then said that he could go ahead and dissolve the Council, and let
auch organization go ahead and do as it pleased; that he couldn't preside
over a reaningless council, that this was not a throat, but he would step
out. I reassured that he was highly esteered in Washington and It was
necessary that he continue as head of the Council. He replied, "But they
disregard to."
ine reiterated that he had lanted four problems, none of which had
been resolved; reiterated that he had planted the cronupama problen a
long time ago, but that propagarria continues indeponient of the Council
and people are not out itke those to the Conresa of stuconta in Sao
Paulo, Miere they repeutt inga like parrots which don't go with Latin
Averican audiences.
"I have asked for arms; either give us rassive aid, one, two, three
million - whatever is necessary, bocause this is to destroy Commun 13,
and we'll take our plans. And we'll furnish the dead, for we can do no
rore. We rust work in apreeront, Lecause now onch tire that I speak,
it's "we shall see, we are going to stiuly," - and nothing happens. No,
no, I shall not preside over another Council existing under these circum-
stances. I have often spent 24 hours without sleeping, trying to pull
together the groups, and meantice, problems arise on all sides. Why?
Because so long as other prouse vet sunport, they won't enter the Council.
The Me? is in contact with you and getting arms; now the Unidad Revolu-
cionario. I retain the ridiculous one. Already I've suffered a lot and
have a son who is a prisoner. And I've talked a lot during these daye,
and I keen on being a puppet, but worse than a pumpet, because a puppet
is noved, but I'm not even roved."
Therefore, I say to you that the groups that want to work with us,
you, the chief of that grow, and I, we ought to resolve all these questions,
for evazole, with the chief of the military group, because he has pulled
together the professional army and the rebel army (olerents) and the army
of literation, such as Varela, Botus, Nino and the boys, who have core
from the brigade." He declared that SOTES is a fighter, is willing to
return to Cuba, ard that he had great confidence in SOTUS.
I assured him that the legalization of SOTUS residence would be
arranged, and that Fr. Hurvitz informed te that he believed something
could be acre for the other three returnees whose nares IT. Firo had
given se.
Dr. Viro reiterated that he rust speak clearly, that he could not
continue thus as a travelling presicent without having anything to give to
his peccle- nothing to the underground through Council action; ner could
he be ignorant of plans which he opposed where Cubans go out to die, and
then having their relatives core to his as responsible. He declared, "I
don't want to live on a budget, preside over an adrinistrative office,
receive people, tell ther lies, saying, "We shall see. The ren who are
SEORET
14-00000
-7-
here (in Council) representing organizations must know something of what
they are going to do and if they ask for 40 rifles, I must be able to say,
"Here they are" - not to give arms directly into their hands - but through
a contact for this. Othervise you people make your plans, and I'll retire
from everything. And be assured that never, never will I say a single word
against the Agency or the United States, nover, nor explain reasons which
shouldn't be explained.
"If I cannot have the responsibility that I should have, I shall not
land myself to what may result in a tragedy. None of the problems I have
planted have been resolved, not that of the registrates nor that of the
Eucumbrey, nor the money to the underground, has been resolved, not the
plan of propagamla that I gave you. I cannot continue to sit in an office,
While you continue operating, as you wish, with my silent consent. You may
chous someone else like Pr. Godoy, who is asking for arms. Choose and
see whether his nate will save Cuba. You are going to create another Fidel,
who is nothing.
I reminded him that I had my talks with him only ton daya before, not
twenty, and that I could talk to no one in Washington until a week ago and
had to have rany conversations with many people, and that his proposals
could not be resolved in such a short time. He returned to the agreeront
that "plans of action de discussed jointly; that if there were objections,
that the objections be discussed. He said thero had been no objections so
fer to discuss; nor objections to propaganda plans. He was to have contact
with a representative of C.I.A. to meet with representatives of organiza-
tions that want to collaborate, and with Dr. Viro - nothing developed on
that he declared that he should have knowledge of the activities of
those that don't want to collatorates and said each day there will be more,
because they want to gain the power for therselves, to act on their own
account. He said he knows there is a "Jim" and a "Robert" and others that
are doing things.
I assured hir he sust realize that there were any problems involved
in his proposals and that tire was essential to work then out. I reminded
hin of his conversation with Mr. Goodwin and the latters' staterent to the
effect that there could be no thought in the foreseeable future of a mili-
tary operation against or invasion of Cuba. Miro countered by referring to
his conversation with the President on 18 July and his (Miro's) complaint
of inactivity. He said the President proposed the recruiting of Cubans in
differont units of the Arry for training so as to utilise ther: at the
opportune time, and that the officers would be invited to our military
schools. Miro said he had gathered Bore of the military together and in-
forced them of this cffer, and the next week he was called to discuss the
recruiting, which he amproved. Ther General Hershey went to see him at
his house, telling him that Cubans wouldn't be sent to Berlin or any such
place but kept in the U.3. available for use later. Firo said, "If there
is to be no invasion, then let's utilize the underground, which needs arms
and roney..
STICHET
14-00000
-8-
He again repeated, "There rust be rassive propaganda; secondly armss
we shall furnish the dead, but I need to know "ilov are we going to die.
He commented that he was going to ask that his photo,raph not be put on
the cover of a certain sagasino bocause he didn't know whether he was
going to continues that in the present circumstances he didn't see how be
could continue. Again I urged that he rust do so, ard that I felt certain
that we could moolve sure of his proposals, probably not to the extent
that he desired, but at least in part, but that tino vas necessary to
accomplish this.
He repeated that the Council needs to have some otion taken in Cups,
tut the Agency koons on undertaking actiora without any connection with
the Council. Further, that he must have the reann for conductiong prope-
panda, such as outlined in the "Operation Grieta." lle asked, so when could
I give hir sore answers. I replied that during the current week I expected
to have reetings in which these matters would te discussed the Lepartzent
of State, with Mr. Goodwin, with representatives of the Agency, and that I
hopod that surething would be resolved, but that he must realize that many
people are involved in such matters and solutions are not reached quickly.
ile reiterated that he had to keep telling his oryonications "wait a little
longer and that this was becoming onlarrassing.
Then he brought up his proposal of having him and the Council go to
Cuba, saying "perhaps it would be advantageous that I die in Cuba, that
the Council ask recojmition from Cuban soil and the military aid of the
United States - all to take place within 48 hours. He added, "I have
told you of the reaction of Cardinal Brellran, "We have done very badly
in the Cuban affair."
I reminded hir that despite the urgency that we all recognized in the
Cuban situation and its threat to the Uriten States and all the Azericas,
there are rany other world problers - Laos, rerlin, etc., - which also
occupy the attention of our government cecnle.
Then I said I wished to take advantage of our meeting to ask him for
information relative to his current budget; first, did he believe that
there were any people recoiving salary fra the Council who might also
be getting financial aid from. H.E.. He said, "No, I would never parrit
that." Then he declared that he had two ways of opertin; when he absorted
the personnel of the various organizations into the CRC: either to cut off
their salaries suddenly, or to put ther to work for their ways that the
"norina" (cayroll) crew a little bit because he had to take in certain
neoule, and that he considered is absorbing them was according to the
rolicy of C.I.A. Then he declared that the raxisw benefit received by
rofugees from. H.F. W. was $100 per inily per month, and that no where here
could a farily live on a hundred a ronth. Hence, he did not feel that he
could cut off the people on the staffs of the CRC organizations, and send
ther to the H.E.W. Therefore, they were assigned to the different
SECRET
14-00000
-9-
"The money for the underground is ruch and contact is doubtful, an
excuse. The problem of Cuba costs a lot of #crey! The people of the
Escambray - it's difficult to deliver artis to them? But we are going to
run that risk. The arts are going to be lost? Well, risks pust le taken."
Pirc again referred to the groups that didn't want to collaborate with the
Council but would collaborate directly with the Agency stating that he
had opposed it and still opposed it, that he received a very affectionate
letter asking him to try work out all the problers tetween us and accept
a solution, and that a representative would be designated to work with hing
that I had appeared and he had spent two very pleasant days with re; that
I was very understanding; that twenty dayn had peased of great anxiety.
("lict twenty but ten," I intermosed.) iis auld he figured that probably ha
ight have arms and hein for the underground and know about plans of action
and had felt strenthened. "Eut" he said, "now I fual knocked down. lione
of the plans or propaganda proposals have been accepted, none. The firing
wall in Cuba continues functioning, 31 dead in 34) days. ly resimation has
been written long ago, and I am ready to submit it as soon as I return to
Mlar.1."
I declared that he must not do that, that be rust have patience., that
it takes time to resolve these things; He replied that he has been waiting
since April and rentioned all the sufferin he had gone through, attacks
by everyone, rothers of prisoners and dead, the Arerican Press, Fortune,
Time, Lifo, New York Times, etc., all against hin along with ALABAU Trellos,
and othoras and that he had supported all of this in silence. He had been
asked it it were true that there was no air sumport and had not answered,
"The other time I kept my lips closed with absolute raith, the next time I
shall huve my eyes open and have rany questions. I don't understand how
you people can deal with sore of these unknown Cubans.
He said, "I've given many proofs of loyalty to you. What they attribute
to me the other day in Miari that "there would be an invasion in a tow
days", that is not true. I have a tapo recording of what I said lich was
"very soon (without rentioning any date) in Cuba there would be unveiled
the great Pascuas (resurrection) of the Fatherlerd. And the press has mis-
interpreted Puscuss as the Pascuns de Navidad (Christsas).
Thus the prend comes out with staterents attributed to Dr. Piro that
the invasion will take place by Christras, completely a lie and nothing
like what I said." I conceded to Dr. Iiro that he had suffered a trerendous
number of attacks in silence and that the pross had over a period of time
core out with critical remarks. I asked his if he planned to pass through
Washington before returning to Miani and he said he didn't have money for
such expenses, that his wife was terribly worried about their son, but
that he would have to remain in New York until Wednesday to attend the
luncheon for all the editors of the Latin American press, who want to con-
verse with him, to help with propaganda but witicut costing the U.S. a
cent.
CEOGET
14-00000
-10-
cormissions within the CRCt finance, propaganda, clandestine, military,
organisation, etc. The ones who are no good or don't want to work, he
said, he would cut off, but that he couldn't just fire sareone suddenly.
He then said saluries were small @ $200, $225 per ronth as an average
except for particular individuals, such as his assistant Aragon, a very
capable person, and the chiefs of the various organizations who work "fu
tize" and receive $400 each; further that he planned to give each organiza-
tion approximately $700 per month for their operating expenses, somo less,
some a little more - (MRR, Rescate, 30 de Nov, 20 de Faye, AAA Independ-
ientes, Kontecristi).
When I questioned whether the Ponteeristi organization was still in
the CliC, he said it was, that only Justo Carillo had dropped out of the
CRC but the group rerained in and had a new head. He added that he had
Just had a request from Carillo to provide his (Carillo) with a thousand
dollars; that Carillo had photographic copies of some checks that he had
paid, to Waldo Frank for propaganda activities against Cula and that
Carillowas asking reimburserent but Miro said he didn't consider he had
to give it to Carillo
Returning to the budget, Kiro Said, "There are the various employees;
there is the item of trips; there are the military people grouped under
the military commission - I cannot let the suffer misery. There are no
students on the payroll because they are being supported by you (the
Agency). And right there a difference is established between those in
the Council and those who receive money from the Agency directly, which
is more than that received by ry people. See how you (the Agency) with-
out intending to, and for reasons of insecurity, are going to destroy
the Council." He