1104-10074-10355
317
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
CONFIDENTIAL
SECRE
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
SUBJECT (Optional)
CI/SO Summary on: Contact Report with (MP) TROIKA-7
FROM
C/CI/SO
ROber
EXTENSION NO.
5847
DATE
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED FORWARDED
EX-9816
1 March 1972
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from whor
to whom, Draw a line across column after each cocamen
CI/SO Internal Use Only
This information is not to b
disseminated outside CI/SO
without prior approval of
Chief, Special Operations
Group, CI Staff.
Originated by: W. E. Gavaghe
TYPED by
: FE/OPS
Based on:
Doc:
Date:
Filed:
SOURCE:
Cryptonym (MPTROIKA-7
Field Station;
ACTION:
DISTRIBUTION:
X/EX NUMERICAL FILE (record
Subject file (MPTROIKA-7/
Other:
INDEXING:
date 15/3/2
14-00000
SECRET
cilso
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
EX-9816
1 March 1972
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
SUBJECT: Contact Report of Meetings with (MPTROIKA-7 in
New York City on 14 February and in Virginia on
17-18 February 1972
1. This memorandum covers recent meetings with
(MPTROIKA-7 in New York City and in the Northern Virginia
area. The meetings were held under secure conditions and
there were no security incidents noted.
2. Operational:
a. United States China Friendship Association
(USCFA) Study Group: 7's persistent efforts to locate
and join a pro-Mao study group finally paid off. The manager
of the China Bookstore finally broke down under (M7's
campaign and put her in touch with a local USCFA study
group under the leadership of Mrs. Susan Warren, aka Frank.
(M7 has attended one session and, based on her initial
observation, provided the assessment of Mrs. Warren attached
hereto at the undersigned's request. (M) 7 believes she has
hit it off with Mrs. Warren because of her understanding
of dialectics (thanks to Andy Ness's tutoring) and, consequently,
she was instructed to attempt to develop a social-business
relationship with here With respect to the other members
of the study group, (M7 claims that the situation, to date,
has not been conducive to ferreting out the identities of
these individuals, but that she hopes that as the group
continues to meet, some rapport will be established with her
classmates.
b. New School and language instruction: (M7
has formally enrolled at the Graduate Faculty of the New
School for Social Research in a course entitled "Comparative
Legal Systems," which studies the theories, institutions,
concepts, customs and which purports to analyze and compare
the law and the administration of law in selected countries,
included China, Japan, Vietnam, Germany, the U.S. and the
Soviet Union. (M7 will also enroll in a French language
instruction course in the near future.
c. Ramparts' Tours - New York Media Workshop's
Womens' Tour: Acting on a suggestion proposed by Mr. Jason
Horn, CI/SO, the undersigned raised the subject of the Women's
Tour which is scheduled to visit London, Paris (where they
will meet the DRV peace delegation) and Rome from 27 May -
25 June 1972 with (M) 7 and instructed her to attempt to determine
the interest in, and likely composition of, the New York
group and explore the possibility of joining such a group.
(M7's
first reaction to the tour was that the cost ($699, which
price includes airfare, trains, hotels, etc.) was too high.
It was explained to her that the cost factor should not
deter her from following through. It was then that (M7
voiced some concern that the timing of the tour may interfere
with her own PCS departure (we had been talking in terms of
mid-May or June 1972 up to this point). It was made clear
to her that no fixed date has been established as yet for
her PCS departure and that the aforementioned tour may well
prove to be of operational interest, e.g. meeting the DRV
delegation and continuing the staging process prior to her
actual departure. (M7 said that she understood and would
look into the matter. She did not believe she would have
any difficulty in covering for funds should she find herself
included on the tour.
d. South East Asia Reports (SEAR): (M)-7 produced
a copy of the first issue of SEAR, a bi-weekly newsletter
put out by the New York University Students Mobilization
Committee, Box 59, Loeb Student Center, 566 LaGuardia Place,
N.Y.C. 10003 (M7 is listed as one of five contributing
staff members on the back page) of this mimeographed new
left publication. A copy of this first issue is attached
hereto. One of (M7's articles will appear in a subsequent
issue of SEAR.
e. JBMINIMUM Testing and Training: As part of
(M7's covert training and assessment in anticipation of her
foreign assignment, the undersigned arranged for two members
of the Psychological Assessment Branch, TSD (Messrs. DeMarco
and Saunders) to administer a JBMINIMUM test to her and to
brief her in the use and value of the JBMINIMUM test in a
field situation. This training and briefing took place on
18 February in a safehouse in N. Arlington, Va. (A copy of
the JBMINIMUM assessment of (M7 will be made a matter of
record in her official dossier) (M7 was introduced as
"Miss Julie" to members of the PAB/TSD for purpose of this
test and briefing. (Mr. Andy Ness devoted the afternoon of
18 February with (M7 for the purpose of continuing her training
in dialectics, which she has found to be particularly useful
in understanding the study group discussion and to permit
her participation.)
2. Administrative:
a. Salary and Operational Advances. The undersigned
paid (M7 her January salary on a $500 advance on 17 February
1972. She also received a $300 advance on 14 February 1972.
These advances were necessary because of the expenses (M7
had incurred in enrolling at the New School and to pay for
her French lessons. (One of the reasons (M7 was brought down
to the Washington area was to straighten out a problem
she was having with her accounting. Hopefully, she is now
convinced that she had been receiving all that was due her.)
b. Tax Administration and Notification of Personnel
Action. (M7 was notified of the change in the tax assessment
and of the adjustments in her salary due to the legislative
pay increase and the withholding of premiums for hospitaliza-
tion.
3. Actions to be taken.
a. (M7's assignment abroad. Per the undersigned's
discussions with Messrs Flitcroft and Cornish) a telepouch
dispatch will be sent to Bangkok Station proposing (M7's
assignment to Bangkok, primarily for housekeeping purposes,
but with a regional mission to perform. (The undersigned
is presently working on this message.)
b. Concelament device. (M7 requested a conceal-
ment device for her microdot viewer which the undersigned will
attempt to obtain from TSD. Additionally, the undersigned
will request TSD to provide concealment devices for (M7's
general use as a storage for papers and funds..
William E. Gavaghen
FE/OPS
Attachments
. As stated
08687