1000000
104-10413-10053
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
ADIRIMIC.
SBORNT
HV-50120
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
PROJECT LINOG
SUBJECT: DEBRIEFING OF DAVID M. WILSTED (ps)
03
COVERS HIM
6 June 1960
1.03 On 1 June 1960 Mr. (John G. Heyn and Mr. Jolin Kennedy of WHD,
Mr.(Robert Brown) of CI/OPS, Mr. (Robert Bryant) of FI/OPS and Mr. (Charles 03
Bray of FI/D met with David M. WILSTED (ps).05
2. WILSTED emphasized that the whole tolephone system in Mexico
"Qity is undergoing a reformation. The company Telefonos de Mexico, S.A.,
has sub-contracted this work of cleaning up and reorganizing the phone
system to the independent firm, Intel. They are cleaning up unused and
old lines, putting in new and spare lines, redefining exchange areas,
Laying underground cables, etc. Eventually we should be better off be-
cause there should be more surplus lines. The renovation work has
hampered much of the LIFEAT work, principally because many of the lines
now are underground and we cannot get access to them before they enter
the central. This is particularly true with respect to the Czech Em-
bassy, to whose telephone lines we cannot obtain access from the vantage
point we now occupy.
3. WILSTED said that we try to keep track of the activities of
"Intel" but since they seem to attack "Colonias" at random, we have no
prior warning of their presence in a certain area.
4. In the recent past, Mexico has been using houses for listing
posts for security reasons. We have more control over the access of
phone company inspectors or repairman to houses. Ilowever, under new
regulations, all now apartment buildings must have telephone lines in-
stalled in the building by the phone company during the construction
phase. This means that the lines and their destination are concealed.
WILSTED proposed that this will mean we can again use apartments since
we can siphon off a line destined for use by another tenant in such a
way that the phone company cannot trace its destination without tearing
the building apart and we can then install a separate line to the build-
ing and hook up the subscriber to this line which, if checked, will
belong to a legitimate subscriber.
5.
One system which has been used effectively is to take one-half
of two separate pairs which have one faulty line each. These two half
pairs then form one good pair which we can use.
6. WIISTED explained that it cost about 3000 pesos to get a
regular telephone. This entails the purchase of a telephone company
bond, which later can be sold.
SECRET
!
1
13-00000
-2-
SECRET
7.
Personnel involved in the tapping of the lines are:
06
(Rene)- who has access to the centrals. He contacts the fol-
lowing ment
Two brothers
(Jose) does exchange connections.
06
8. The take from each basehouse is collected early in the morning
before office hours by RAFANELLI. He only enters one basehouse which is
occupied by an elderly couple. All other contacts are in automobiles
made at different spots each day of the week. RAFANELLI then takes the
material to a meeting between him, WILSTED and SECHEN where RAFANELLI
turns the material over to SECHEN and they all discuss the problems and
plans for the day.
19. According to WILSTED there is no live monitoring done by any
of the basehouse keepers.
10. There follows a list of the basehouses and the lines covered
at gach bager
CHANGED
By 63
? YES!
24
a) (Calero 39)
b)
24
- formerly covered American commies, now
no lines. Being held for future use.
(Juanacatlan 179)- Cuban residence
24.
c) (Atlixco 47)
Russian Commercial
E. T. (Nicaraguan)
- 2 Polish
Seborer
Tropete
Bekier
DOI
JUNE 1
d) (Tenanzingo)
24
- Cuban military office
Cuban Ambassador's office
Campos (travel agency)
1. spare
e) (Aristoteles 80) UAR
24
Ejercito Nacional 540 (name of person un-
known)
f) (Suderman & Horacio) - facilities for three lines. Formerly
processed the Czech lines. Now nothing
but being held open.
24
g) (Cuautla 131)
- 3 Soviet Embassy (tapped in the Central)
1 Soviet propaganda office (tap in box)
SECRET

