14-00000
104-10225-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
THUS PORINT IS CHARGED 10 10
RI TURN THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION SECTION, RMS ON OR BEFORE
DATE INDICATED.
A-50
IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
17.78
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
1790 USE PREVIOUS FINTIONS.
コン
12 mar
5. Corbat
06/EFK
73
(47)
DO NOT REMOVE ANY PAPERS OR
MUTILATE FOLDER.
78-112.9
3432393
الا
Opera
FILE NO wawRCIA AD 32
DOCUMENT:
FOLDER:
317
PAGE:
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
RETURN TO
IP/ARD
60-50
Rm665
610 USEDROUS
EDITIONS
A
2373
RETURN TO RECORDS CENTER
1.
OMLIEDIATELY AFTER DSE
P
BOX:
2
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
faider #
:
1952 تال-December 1952
NCFE
14-00000
✓ SECHET
Security Information
i
31 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Doputy Director for Plans
SUBJECT:
Background Material for Dr. Tyson's visit on Wednesday,
Jamiary 7th.
1. I would like the attached papers to call to your attention
the very good work that Dr. Tyson has done which is generally not known
here. His successful use of emigros in making a calm and factual pre-
sentation to the Acerican public of conditions behind the Iron Curtain
18, in my opinion, the basis on which the Crusade for Freedom can be run
by the Heritage Foundation in the future.
2. Dr. Tyson shares our doubts about the Free University in
Exile. He agrees that the two principles upon which the University was
founded
A. that there were sufficient qualified Iron Curtain
escapees to justify institutionalizing their education; and
B. that by creating such an institution for escapees an
esprit de corps is created, together with a determination
on the part of the escapoes to serve their homelands at
some future date
'have not been proved.
3. All of the evidence to prove the validity of these principles
is certainly not in. The evidence at hand raises serious doubts, and is
as follow
A. Of the current 208 students of the Free University, 37
are Yugoslave, ami 12 were born in Western European countries.
(The high total ratio - almost 25% of the student body
of
Yugoslav students, which is not a target country, together with
the non-satellito born students indicates an inability to recruit
the kinds of students the University was intended to train.) It
should also be noted that from the information available to us it
is not possible to determine what proportion of those listed as
born in target countries actually left them before Soviet domina-
tion. I have the impression, which is substantiated by the recruit
ing missions of Mr. Royal Tyler throughout Europe and even Turkey,
that suitable candidates are already extremely difficult to find.
It should be noted also that of the 64 outside scholarships given
to exiles in various European Universities, 16 are for Yugoslavs.
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
-2-
B. We have had various raporte which indicate that the
morale of a mumber of students at Strasbourg is not good. These
morale problema arise from a variety of reasons, among which are:
(1) They are not entirely certain why they are there
and just what the American sponsors intend for the
(2) They fear that after they finish their education
they will be without jobs,
(3) There has been a steady and systematic campaign
carried on by French Communist students at the University
of Strasbourg to demoralize and disorganize the FEUE student
body. In addition, several students are suspected of being
espionage agents.
4. Dr. Tyson is leaving for Europe on the 21st of January to make
a thorough investigation and evaluation of the Free University in order to
answer these questions. We are alding him by having the officials of the
President's Escapes Program make available a complete inventory of escapees
who might be potential candidates for the University.
5. Dr. Tyson was not the instigator of the proposals for a gymnasia
for the Free University. The proposals were made and pushed by Royal Tyler
and Spencer Phenix. The handling of this matter as far as Tyler was concerned
was another example of his difficulties in dealing with Phenix for, as finan
cial officer of NCFE, and having no position in the separate corporation,
that 13, the Free University, Phenix has and is dealing with matters of
policy.
THOMAS W. ERADEN,
Chief,
International Organizations Division
Attachments: a/s
IO/TONIC: WFD/cmm
Distribution:
CIO
Orig Addressee
1 cc
1ce
1 cc
IO/TONIC
RI
SECRET
Security to fקוז
14-00000
SECURITY INFORMATION
31 December 1953
MEMORAL DUM FOR:
VIA:
DEFUTY DIRECTOR (FLINS)
SUBJECT:
Chief, Political and i sychological Harare
NCFE Cooperation with. CIA
The cooperation of NCFE in certain matters should be brought
to your attention.
1. In aiding the Amoney to take advantage of theSlansky
trials, NCFE: (a) has made available complete monitoring of
the trial; (b) is translating into Hungarian, Felis, humanian,
Bulgarian, and albmian, transcripts of the:rial; ani, (c) is
sending us complete extracts of the Iron Curtain press dealing
with the trial. all of this has been, or is being done with
great speed, NCFE is making a major project out the
Slansky trials and will distribute a pamphlet on the subject
in the satellite languaes to its extensive overseas mailing
lists.
2. NCFE is relasing to the press and carrying on its
broadcast the substance of incoming cable 21500 aated 1 December
fron Vienna, on Vienna reace Conference.
3. Inadition, SUFF has done some specific research for
us with skill and great speed.
10/TONIC: WFD/hka
Distributions:
Orig. & 1- Addressee
THCS BRADEN
Chief
International rganizations Division
1ee
em
2 cc
10/TO:IC
1 cc
CO
1 cc
RI
SECRET
SECURITY INFORMATION
14-00000
........
S
Chief, Cover Division, Plans/FI
Chief, Contact Division, m
Crusade for Freedom
8.1450
19 December 1952
HII-591
The attached extract from the 12 December 1952 issue of
!
Fifth Army's Domestic Intelligence Report is forwarded as being
of possible interest to your office.
Enel: 1
E. 4. ASHCRAFT
14-00000
Botre་`,
Hotro
SECITY ויי
"An S. CHEN approached the Head of t
A-Dame versity Security Section, and rested
a list of all Chinese nationals attending the
University. Chen represented himself as a member
of the STUDENTS RELATIONS SECTION, COMMITTEE FOR A
FREE ASIA, INC., 105 Narket Street, San Francisco,
California. CHEN stated that his reason for
requesting such a list was that his organization
was active in promoting better relations between
Chinese nationals attending colleges and universities
in the United States and the American people.
Dame received for a second time a pamphlet from the
COMMITTEE FOR A FREE ASIA entitled, "Asia in the
World Today'. Officials at Notre Dame have also
been contacted by the NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR A FREE
EUROPE, 110 West 57th Street, New York 19, New York.
This organization requested a list of all foreign
instructors and students presently instructing or
attending courses at the University. A businesa
card attached to a pamphlet revealed the following
information: Miss Ellen M. STUDELI, 1223 East 57th
Street, Chicago 37, Illinois, Chinese Student and
Alumni. Service, Chicago Area, COMMITTEE ON FRIENDLY
RELATIONS AMORO PORRION STUDENTS, 29 Broadway,
Dew York 7, New York. There is no information in
0-2 files this Headquarters relative to STUDELY or
CHEN."
14-00000
FEDURATION
SECRET
16 Lecember 1952
SUBJECT:
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Edward W. Barrett and NCFE
REFERENCE
Your Note Lated 11 December 1952
2017 1689
I'm informed by Admiral Killer that the matter of Edward W. Barrett
Joining NCFE as a director, was discussed at an Executive Committee meet-
ing a month ago.
No formal decision was nede because of considerable opposition 60
the matter has been tabled.
SECRET
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organisations Avision
14-00000
C
0
Y
15 December 1952
Dear Archie:
I much enjoyed our chance for a talk, and Bill Durkee,
who assists me in the subject we discussed, is tremendously
enthusiastic, as I am, about the possibility that you will
consider favorably the appointment Frank mentioned.
Let me state again what seems to me most important in
the facts under discussion. The job is of national and
world-wide importance. It can help achieve greatness. It
can endanger us all. It requires a man of imagination and
ideas but also a man of deep and thoughtful responsibility
to discharge it well.
I should like you to consider that I am at your service
at any time to give you any facts you would like to have ar
any opinions for that matter. All of us here consider that
we would be greatly privileged to be able to help you if you
undertook the job.
Archibald Alexander
1430 33rd Street, N. W.
Washington, D. C.
Sincerely,
Thomas W. Braden
14-00000
........
S
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
INSTRUCTIONS: Officer des gnations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a ling should be drawn across shoot
and each comment numbered to correspond with the number in the "TO" column. Each officer should initial (check mark insufficient)
bafare further routing. The Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
FROM:
C/10
NO.
DATK
3-5308
11 December 1952
1.
DDCI
To
ROOM
NO.
DATE
PECO
71004
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
COMMENTS
2.
3.
DURKee
Chefor file
5.
7.
3.
P
10.
11.
12.
13.
WPD
EYES ONLY
Braden
How much more
does he want?
Jagree heat we
should do evaMer
possible to get a
struct accounting.
Thisisa Jemues
Malli Qaf
14.
15.
FORM NO. 51-10
FEB 1950
SECRET
10-61155-1
U. S. CORRERENT PRINTING OFFICE
14-00000
:
ク
July 8,1952
Note: Nelson please deliver this to Allen.
To: Allen Dulles
You recently asked me for our views on Yugoslavia.
The enclosed memorandum 10 a consensus formed from
all of our key staff members. It also meets with
the approval of John Hughes, I think this is a fair
Btatement of what we are doing to date and what our
views are. I hope this will be of some use to you.
Enclosure
Leonnd
14-00000
2017 2,
All the
i
MEMORANDUM
The Bathonal Committee for Free Europe's policy in respect
to Yugoslavia and a and Yur mocja okile activities may be summarized in
the following statements.
i
ces it plan to interfers,
1. The Committee does not now,
by radio on otherwise, with tas domestic stairs of the Lugosiay
people or of the Titoist regime.
2. In so far as our anti-Stalinist ains and activitios coincide,
wo see no reaton to shetruct such functional and mutually beneficial
arrangozente as may from time to lige present themselves. Spec111-
cally, we have no objection to exchanging with Radio Felgrade
certain types of radio materials in rus to the countrios under
Soviet doination which might enhance tre srrectiveness of our
radio prorams or otherwise aid the wo of the National Committ
for a Free Europe.
3. As an anti-Communist organization dedicated to the concepts
of democracy and of individual freedom we feel it is entirely
consistent and proper to extend aid to crat coratic Yugoslava exiled
from their homelanda, within the budgetary and other limitations
under which we oPOTAL. To this end a total of some 69 Yugoslave
retained by the Committee and engaged in five types of work.
are
مرا
a) In Radio Free Europe, which has no Yugoslav desk,
13 Yuave have been engaged as information analysts,
program advisors and translators because of their
technical abilities.
b) In the Mid-European Studies Center 31 Yugoslavs are
ongaged in research project8 666 with the East
European Enquiry, the Law Project and the East European
Accessions List, and include 7 scolarship students.
c) In the Research & Publications Service 9 Yugoslava
are entated in analysis of the 140siev press and other
sources of Information and in the publication of factual,
non-propagandistic studies and balletins designed to keep
the emigration and interested Americans informed on
domestic events.
1) The Free Europe University in Ezile has selected 13
Yugoslav Suents on the same casts of individual merit
as students from the other European Communist nations
have been granted scholarships to study at Strasbourg.
11
e) Finally, the National Councils Division gives financial
aid to three formerly prominent reslavs in recognition
of their past services to the cause of democracy.
In conclusion, the number of slave thus supported by the
Committee's various divisions represents 1.4% of the total exile
staff.
SSW/bvb
"Sent to State Dept. 28 July 1952
1077 1671
b
SECRET
Security Information
11 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: CHIEF, POLITICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL WARFARE
SUBJECT:
National Committee for a Free Europe
1. I would like to call DD/P's attention to this unsolicited
memorandum. It is additional evidence for my own observation made
to him orally that the work of backstopping NCFE is being carried
forward in a manner which at least attempts to meet the challenge
of servicing the entire Agency in those aspects of NCFE work which
can be useful to the various Divisions of the Agency.
2. As he is aware, NCFE conducts an enormous amount of
research and other activity. I believe we can now say with some
certainty that this record is being put to use by Washington.
Attachment
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
Memo from DC/O, SI dtd 26 Nov. 52
SECRET
Security Information
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
Office Memorandum
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO
:
Chief, PP/IOD
FROM
$
SUBJECT:
Ο
DATE: 26 November 1952
Deputy Chief, Operations Staff, 0/31
Fulfillment of Requirement RDA-3345
1. This offices wishes to express its appreciation for
the excellent cooperation provided by your TONIC Branch in
connection with our requirement RDA-3345 concerning higher
education in Poland.
2. The material which we received met our need precisely
and enabled us to close out this requirement.
Hayden
HAYDEN CHANNING
CSI/JEQuigley:bm
Distribution:
Orig and 1
Forward
Subject file
1
1
Daily rending file
1 Chrono
1.
Singel
1 Chief, SRD (W. Platt)
!
SECRET
Security Information
14-00000
است
SECURITY
11 December 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
University of the Saar
1. The University of the Saar was created on 8 March 1947.
It has four facilities -- two in Saarbrucken (Letters and Law)
and two in Hombourg (Medicine and Science). Faculty members are
French, German, Swiss, British and Saarois.
2. A number of "institutes" exist with undefined relations
to the University though financed, as is the rest of the University,
by the French Government, and include a special institute for
interpreters, an institute for economic science, and a European
Institute. The support of the French Government of this University,
aside from its merits, is part of the French attempt to Europeanize
the Saar.
3. The European Institute, devoted to European unity, is a
recent creation and is largely the result of the promotions of
former Deputy, Andre Philip. It was the European Institute to
which the Herald Tribune article specifically refers.
4. The University participated extensively, especially the
European Institute, in the European Youth Campaign. Some of the
specific activities were as follows:
March 1952: The Campaign cooperated with the International
Institute of the University of Sarrebruck in arranging a
meeting of young professors in the Saar and another meeting
of youth leaders, both to discuss European problems. Films
were supplied by the Campaign for both these meetings.
By the end of April, 25 youth organizations (practically all)
in the Saar were associated with the Campaign. During April,
May, and June an extensive program of discussion groups was
arranged in the secondary schools throughout the Saar. These
groups were sponsored jointly by the Campaign and the youth
groups of the Saar. The groups discussed all phases of the
unity question but concentrated particularly on the Schuman
3-5794
1
14-00000
-2-
Plan due to the economic position of the Saar in this
matter. Films and publications of the Campaign were used
in the discussions. 7000 students participated.
During June 1952, in cooperation with the Campaign, students
and professors of the International Institute formed a
committee along with youth leaders to discuss the particular
problems of the Saar in a United Europe.
On March 27, 1952 the Campaign held a large study group in
cooperation with the European Institute of the University
of the Saar. Students attended from Aix, Hambourg, Oxford,
Tubingen, Leyden, Nancy, Berlin and Paris. Lecturers were
provided by the Campaign.
SECURITY
Thrines 20. Braden
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
DD/P 135
10 Horecker 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International. Organizations Division
SUBJECT
: University of the Saar
1. In the Sunday November 9 1ssue of the New York Perald
Tribune there was a rather full and very interesting coりも
of the purposes and objectives of the University of the Saar,
which I sen anxious for the addressees of the original and
copies of this memorandum to read. The writer of the piece has
evidently been much impressed with the efforts of this institution
in the field of advancing European unity, and if the sccount which
he gives is an accurate one, it seems to me that we cold (a) know
more about this and (b) give consideration to provising come
support for it if it is good. It might even prove to be the case
that this is a better and more deserving show than come of the
activities which we are currently supporting having similar
objectives. I think we are generally agreed that it is better to
get in behind and give support and encouragement to a zovement
which has demonstrated the ability to stand on its on Leet than
to try to create and sustain an activity which would cat exist
but for our own contributions.
2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of this activity, etc.
cc:
C/WE (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE
ta
FRANK G. WISHER
Deputy Director (Plane)
1
SECRET
Security Intestina
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
DD/P 135
10 November 1952
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, International Organizations Division
SUBJECT
:
University of the Saar
1. In the Sunday November 9 issue of the New York Herald
Tribune there was a rather full and very interesting account
of the purposes and objectives of the University of the Saar,
which I am anxious for the addressees of the original and
copies of this memorandum to read. The writer of the piece has
evidently been much impressed with the efforts of this institution
in the field of advancing European unity, and if the account which
he gives is an accurate one, it seems to me that we should (a) know
moro about this and (b) give consideration to providing some
support for it if it is good. It might even prove to be the case
that this is a better and more deserving show than some of the
activities which we are currently supporting having similar
objectives. I think we are generally agreed that it is better to
get in behind and give support and encouragement to a movement
which has demonstrated the ability to stand on its own feet than
to try to create and sustain an activity which would not exist
but for our own contributions.
2. I should appreciate receiving from you in due course
your estimate of the significance of this activity, etc.
cc:
ts
FRANK G. WISNER
Deputy Director (Plans)
C/WE (Attention: Mr. Dulin)
C/EE
SECRET
Security lalo יילו
14-00000
SECRET
Security Information
10 December 1954
MEMORANDUM FOR: DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
SUBJECT:
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
Call by Spencer Phenix on DDCI
Bear Roylar
3.5212
1. Spencer Phenix will call upon the DDCI Friday for the
purpose of taking up with hun certain questions among which are
the following:
a. A gymnasium for the Strasbourg University. The history
of the gymnasium request is as follows:
On 8 August 1952, at a meeting of the PRC, NCFE
proposed capital expenditures of $377,500 for the
Free University in Exile. The amount was placed in
a reserve fund along with other requested budget items.
It was agreed that funds held in this reserve could be
released to NCFE by the DD/P in conjunction with the
DD/A if in their Judgment the submission of further
data justified such expenditures.
On 17 September 1952, Spencer Phenix, for NCFE,
made a request for $47,000 to be released from the CIA-
held reserve for the construction of a gymnasium at the
Free University.
This request was rejected by the DD/P. He said he
would reconsider the request if further data supported
it.
On 8 October 1952, Mr. Phenix made another request
supplying further data. This time the request was
reduced to $43,500. This request was also rejected by
the DD/P.
Security tetoion
14-00000
Pre action
an indicated on perending Plann
it wrald
contede
confund
ewho is con
Certainly
Not in the prin
Jurbrich
approvall!!
It lliure in ungling
te Ithun - it
to
should be
flolly
Umail.
CIA.
I ful heat
reg
t and
2
thiet it be an
extravagemen
cons
By memorandum of 5 December 1952, Mr. Phenix refers
to the fact that the trustees have given formal approval
to the establishment of a gymnasium and that his under-
standing of the reserve fund is that when the Board of
Directors of NCFE ask for the money, they recoive it at
once. He says that there appears to be some misunder-
standing of this procedure, pointing out that the locus
of misunderstanding "is in and around Frank W's office."
bigber
authority.
780
b. The Turkish Broadcasting Station. Mr. Phenix intends
to raise this question as a basic policy matter, he having been
informed by us that while there is great enthusiasm for the project
and while the State Department has set January 15th as the date by
which VOA must either secure agreement from the Turkish Government
or withdraw itself from consideration, the basic policy question of
whether RFE then moves in has not been definitively settled.
Mr. Phenix would like to know definitely now whether, contingent
upon the failure of the Voice to gain entry to Turkey, NCFE can
proceed with the building of a Turkish station. This item, which
will probably be in the neighborhood of five million dollars, was
presented at the PRC meeting, at which time it was agreed it would
be considered as a separate project at a later date.
c.
The Slansky Trial. Mr. Phenix is worried about the
statements in the Slansky trial indicating use of RFE by the United
States Government to send operational messages. We have told him
that this secret arrangement was made with RFE by CIA men in the
field. No approval of Headquarters was ever requested. Corrective
steps have been taken in the FE Division to insure that action which
may compromise operational facilities does not occur again without
prior consultation with and approval of top authority of NCFE and
d. Barbara Bowen. Mr. Phenix is concerned about a little
girl who works in the Munich office, who through some mischance of
several years standing is still on the roles of this Agency and draws
retirement pay, although her salary is paid by NCFE. Phenix regards
this as a penetration though in fact Miss Bowen is a valued employee
of NCFE and has no contact with anyone from CIA. We are trying to
regularize the situation by affording her the opportunity of resigning
from the Agency or resigning from NCFE.
N.B.
Thew in
already in
frering
frel
Laar-
Let us not
much into
something new
in the Las
wo thr
e. Second Installation for Strasbourg University. The
trustees of the Free University in Exile have voted to create a
German-speaking free university in exile, probably to be located in
the Saar. Phenix reports in his memorandum of December 5th that the
✓ DDCI has given Royal Tyler assurance regarding this extension.
en nas
your
with the existing offent
rather tiene collinst
to create somaltinng
enlivety
might with
to help aut
whether we
new
st
14-00000
-3-
Mr. Phenix requests assurance that if Mr. Royal Tyler approaches
French authorities at the Bear to create such a university and is
granted permission, the day will supply the funds. De formal
request has been made and tris project of course has nos been
budgoted.
f. Names of penslosed Army and Navy Officers. In compliance
with DD/P Notice No. 20 Led on 27 October, we have asked Mr. Phenix
to furnish the names of peatoned Army and Navy officers employed by
NCFE. Mr. Phenix is concerned about the legal ramifications of this
step, stating his fear that what this order implies for aim is that
the monies he dispenses at Treasurer are government fonda. He has
been assured by us that the purpose of the Agency-wide request is to
inventory those who are receiving Navy and Army pensions and serving
in proprietary organizations. He has also been assure that Army and
Navy pensioners in his organization will be exempt from any action
taken by the Agency on the groblem of double pay. He is quite natur-
ally worried about it.
2. The Philosophy of Spencer Phenix. In arguing is case on
the above questions, and osters, Phenix brings to his expport the
argument that he is not dispensing government funds. Ze says that
once government funds reaca sae 1848 Foundation they become private
funds. This is no mere self-delusion for the sake of maintaining a
position before his conscience. Because from this conviction he
proceeds to argue:
روم
a.
that the Agency cannot ask him to furnish such names
as suggested soove, or lists and records of any kind.
b. that the Agency has no right to quary the decisions
of the staff and directors as to the experccture of
funds once released by the Agency,
c.
that the Apenry has no right to intervene is NCFE
affairs or to Lesse guidance or instructions after
funds have been passed. Phenix modities tois point
by volunteering that the Directors are always glad
to receive acrose from friends such as DDC.
3. Spencer Phenix is a good man at his job and I
derstand
the ultimate
respasitolig lang an
often untempered by good
the futility of arguing priccicle rather than cases. Nevertheless,
the Phenix philosophy, args as it is to the staff and directors
of NCFE, and stated to us whenever possible frequen:17 without
relation to the facts under ciscussion
humor, is beginning to try souls of other goot ren.
then trewn
he in in
Thew in
neither lin
on lisse front, sed
e last li
cand othen
conflict with
Bayuly
an
and
itaffe,
violation z
exprera
anwed at
all the
in 1949.
All
awes
20.
THOMAS W. BRADEN
Chief
International Organizations Division
シング
pse
14-00000
Dear Allen,
مغر
When we were talking on telophone last wook you say
Becton that Alexander
posibly be Interested in t
N.C.F.. and that he might worth considerin, as Pr
to succeed Min Miller. As you requested, I wave not a
ed als neue to anyone as yet ant will not to so until
further from you. As I untersteni it, you are goin to
talking to him some time this week and hope to ascertain
then whether he himself would have some intorest in the
Whenever you do gut any further information on this place Set
me know.
Keantino, a number of esser names have been suggestet
we will give them careful colleration. Naturally we
discuss them with you before takin any definite action.
Regas
14-00000
D
Der Hudrood,
December 1, 1952
The enclosed documenta may be of interest to you and
are sent to you or inform tion.
1002
Sincercly yours,
wis
Whiting Stratton:
14-00000
COY
The Senerable Joseph C. Grew
2543 End Drive, N.W.
Fashington S, D. C.
Dear Mr. Grew:
October 31, 1952
Sttsched herewith you will
methods thet have been adopted by
the satellite states.
tind a most interesting sumrary of the
the USSR to attract the minds of youth is
It has long been known that some such program was being followed, cat
it is only recently that deti has become available.
In contrast to these methods, efforts expendea in this country to t
our os people the resi merning of freecom as reprecentea by western desceracy
are rests. It is almost sare to state that we have been relying solely on en
inuste, sentimentei aversion to "communism", because no intelligent or systematic
meens ve as yet been organised that will capture the minds of the young people
of the United States in the same L'ervent manner that the communist ideoisey 208
teisen bord of Russian youth.
For a little more tarn a year, in connection with the reorganization of
the researca activities of the Division of Intellectual Cooperation we have been
atrempting to enlist the heap of American intellectuais not the intercie.
There as s cirference.
From the very beginning I have been amazed to discover the dearth 25 people
who are Caniliar with that section of Eur pe which engages NCFE interest the
beit of countries extending on the Baltic to the Aegean. I was curious rind
out if there were so rew upon whom we could drew for nep, so I started en Anquiry.
The rests are now being compted.
Ce must remember that the teaching of history or of government in America
h. never been emphasized to the same degree that it has in Europe. The curricula
of the secondary schools in thet ort of theorld cover those subjectsch more
comprehensively then is the case with us. It was difficult for me to appreciate
tris et first, but our inquiry has verified it without any doubt. In practicaly
all European countries now on either side of the iron Curtain it has long been
traction to emphasice instruction in histor, becruce the tides of war and
chenge ve ebbed and flowed across their unds for many centuries. We have
reen
stea and in most respects free from Foreign 1: luences as we gave
develops our democratic processes. Toury American Foreign policy faces ereve
14-00000
The Honorable Joseph C. Grow
-2-
October 31, 1952
issues, and in one part of the world it is deeply concerned with the very
section of Europe thout which mal NCFE Activities revolve. Yet the American
public is practically illiterate respecting this ere, both itse pest and its
pre: ent. I know whereof I speck as a result of the ivmiry noove referred to.
When it is completed I am inclined to think the results will be startling,
particularly if we bear in mind tut the i rues at store must be settled; that
they are a concern to this country; and thet our people are practically unirformed.
They now little 1. anything bout the historical similicence behind what has
occurred or will occur er the next few decades untold beeruse they ave had no
opportunity to learn the nistoric significence of it all.
In this country torty there are approximately 600 colieres end universi-
ties ofrerin four year courses of study Lending to the Bachelor of Arts degree.
This figure does not include the 575 junior colleges which usually conduct non-
derrec-granting programs to yours in longth coproximately the first two years
of the traditional four year proprim. As far as our incuity her gene it is alrendy
spparent that there are only severe), dozen institutions in the former froup waich
offer instruction in this area, and very few in the latter. Most of those which
do cover this arce are the farger universities where the courses are roully
graduate in character and thus elective. in many instances brici coverage is
supplied in curvey courses, but even these con pot snu do not develop the atten-
tion that historically this part of the world now deserves. Then this survey is
completed a comprehensive report of the findirre will be mode. It vill refer to
colleges included in a liut compiled o the American Council on Evection which
is the overall representative organization in this country for higher education.
I am colling the attention of the Directers to this situstion becsuce it
seems to me we must realize that the American public not only does not know whet
we are doing, out actually can not understand the significance en se are trying
to do it. Generation efter generation has grown up in America illite ste about the
outside world. What we are discoverer