14-00000
104-10217-10000
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CATAL
10 May 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Clemard Joseph CHARLES
G
1. On 29 April 1963 Dorothe Matlack, Domestic Exploitation
Section, ACS, telephoned to the affect that a banker named Clemard
Joseph Charles had left Haiti six days earlier and had just arrived
in New York. A friend of Charles, named Joseph Dryer, 109 Lakewood
Avenue, West Palm Beach, Florida, had written to General Delmar,
former Co Antilles Command, recommending Charles as a man of great
interest to the US Government in view of the events in Haiti. Charles
was described as President of the Banque Commerciale, Port au Prince,
Haiti, who is in President Duvalier's favor. Mrs. Matlack mentioned
that she had alerted Col. Farm Keil in Miami to contact Dryer in
order to obtain more background information and assessment on
Charles.
2. On 1 May 63 Mrs. Matlack advised that Charles was staying at
the Park Sheraton Hotel, New York, and that he had telephoned her
since her name had been supplied to him by Dryer. Charles considered
her to be his point of contact in Washington. According to Mrs. Matlack,
Charles had appointments to see Vice President Johnson, Senator Keating,
and Congressman Rogers (Florida). However, Charles was willing to talk
to representatives of Mrs. Matlack's office. Mrs. Matlack stated that
the Haitian Desk man in Miami was ready to go to New York to talk to
Charles and invited CIA to accompany him. Charles speaks very little
English and a fluency in French was therefore required for the inter-
view. Mrs. Matlack stated that she was unable to obtain a French
linguist from First Army, Governor's Island, but he would not be an
intelligence officer. It was decided that Jean Balog, New York
Office, who has a knowledge of the French language would accompany
the ACSI representative. It was also arranged that Mr. Balog would meet
the ACSI representative (Captain Rogers) at the Park
Sheraton Hotel where Charles was staying.
3. On 2 May 63 Mrs. Matlack reported that Col. Keil had interviewed
Mr. Dryer in West Palm Beach. Dryer had appointed Charles as Director
of his bank in Haiti. Charles, according to Dryer, formerly had no
political ambitions but in view of the current political situation in
Haiti, Charles now thinks that he may some day be president. Dryer
described Charles as well-connected, politically and financially, on
both sides of the fence in Haiti. He is also a good friend of President
Duvalier. Dryer had given Charles letters of introduction to Senator
Keating and to other officials in Washington. Charles wanted to see
President Kennedy and indeed had gone to the White House to arrange
for an appointment. He was well received by the President's appoint-
ment secretary and invited to dinner that evening with the appointment
-2-
SUBJECT Clemard Joseph CHARLES
secretary. Through a misunderstanding, however, Charles did not
attend the dinner but went to New York instead.
4. Charles is travelling, according to Dryer, with a German
geologist named de Mohrenschildt. de Mohrenschildt is associated
with Charles in a business venture in Haiti and is trying to arrange
a meeting for Charles with Vice President Johnson.
5. On 3 May 63 Jim Balog telephoned to state that he had had a
five-hour session the previous day with Charles and that he had
obtained both personality data and views by Charles on what the
United States should do in the current Haitian situation. Balog
advised that he was transmitting this information to Washington.
Upon arrival, copies of the teletypes were transmitted to ACSI
(Mrs. Matlack), Division, and the Latin America Branch.
6. On 6 May 63 Hugo Stants, Support Branch, advised that
Division wished to meet to Charles and Balog was asked to arrange
an appointment. Mrs. Matlack telephoned at approximately 1725 to
advise that she had just received a telephone call from Mrs. de
Mohrenschildt asking assistance in obtaining hotel reservations in
Washington. Upon being told that we had no special means of obtain-
ing reservations, Mrs. Matlack stated that she would check with the
State Department Protocol Office to determine which hotels would
admit Negro guests. Mrs. Matlack finally made reservations at the
Willard Hotel. A check with Jim Balog revealed that he had arranged
for Charles to meet the CIA representative in the lobby of the Willard
Hotel, Washington, D. C., at 12:00 noon on 7 May. Attempts to reach
Mrs. Matlack that afternoon were unsuccessful. At 0850, 7 May, a
call was made to Mrs. Matlack to confirm that Charles would be in
Washington on that day and that arrangements had been made for a
meeting with an Agency representative for 12:00 noon. Mrs. Matlack
reiterated that both Mrs. de Mohrenschildt and Charles had called her
the previous evening to confirm a luncheon appointment with
her. Mrs. Matlack was concerned that CIA and Army would not be
working at cross purposes. She had received authorization from
ACSI to meet Charles at lunch and felt that it would not be politic
for her to withdraw from her appointment since Army considered her
the point of contact with Charles. Hugo Stants informed Division
of the conflict and proceeded on the assumption that the CIA repre-
sentative would proceed as originally planned. The CIA repre-
sentative offered to withdraw shortly thereafter but Mrs. Mat-
lack declined the offer and requested that a meeting later in the
afternoon be arranged. Mrs. Matlack believed that she was more
than sufficiently involved in the situation and that by accepting
-3-
SUBJECT Clemard Joseph CHARLES
7. I saw Mrs. Matlack in the lobby of the Hotel Willard shortly
before noon, and a few minutes later, Mr. Charles arrived, accompanied
by Mr. and Mrs. de Mohrenschildt. He lunched in the restaurant in
the hotel. Mr. de Mohrenschildt mentioned that he had been born in
Rostov, Russia, but during the Bolshevik Revolution had been taken to
Poland as a small child. He had spent approximately 30 years in
Poland prior to World War II and had served in the Polish Army.
He also mentioned that he had been a member of an ICA team to Yugo-
slavia in 1957 and while in Belgrade had met Gromyko who was visiting
Belgrade at the time. He had spoken to Gromyko and was invited to
visit Poland, which invitation he had accepted. He now has a home in
Dallas. He has a Ph.D. in geology and has had some teaching experience.
Mrs. de Mohrenschildt was born in Paris, France. Her father was
Russian and her mother French, and she is now or has been a fashion
designer. Mr. de Mohrenschildt mentioned that he has known Charles
for some time and that he is a partner with him in a real business
in Haiti.
8. Both Charles and de Mohrenschildt were anxious to arrange
meetings with government officials in Washington. I mentioned to
Charles that a meeting had been arranged for him at 15 and that a
Mr. Green would meet him in the lobby. At 1410 Mrs. Matlack, Mr. and
Mrs. de Mohrenschildt and I departed and Charles remained in the
lobby waiting for contact.
9. In the course of the luncheon conversation, Charles had
mentioned to Mrs. Matlack that he desired to see a Mr. Wies, AID, to
discuss 1963 aid to Haiti. Later that afternoon Mrs. Matlack called to
state that she had called the State Department to pass along Charles'
request. Mr. Fitzgerald (State) had called her back to pass on the
Haitian Desk man's extreme displeasure that anyone in the United States
Government should be in official contact with Charles. The desk man
considered Charles to be close to the Duvalier Government, to have
been involved in several shady financial dealings, and in general, to
be an undesirable character. Mrs. Matlack asked whether the Agency
had any interest in Charles which would dictate further contact with
Charles.
10. Mayo Stants checked with DD/P Division and determined that as
a result of the meeting with Charles, the ID/P Haitian Desk had no
further interest in contacting him. I told Mrs. Matlack that our interest
seemed to have been satisfied and that I believed we should disengage
ourselves as gracefully as possible.
11. Wayne Delson, DD/P Coordinator, called on 7 May to inquire
concerning our involvement in the Charles case. He stated that ACSI
had called him earlier that day to assure him that ACSI had no direct
interest in Charles and that it was acting as an intermediary at the
request of General Delmar who had passed the lead to General Fitch.
ACSI was concerned that due to the mix up in appointments to see
Charles, charges might later be made that ACSI had interfered or
had obstructed CIA contact with Charles. I explained to Delson what
had happened and he later called back to state that ACSI was completely
satisfied in the way the matter had been handled.
12. On 8 May Mrs. Matlack telephoned to advise that the Operational
Branch of ACSI was discussing the Charles case with DD/P to determine
future course of action. She was still somewhat concerned over her own
position in the case since Charles considered her to be the focal point
in Washington. I reiterated to her that the matter was one for either
the State Department or the operational elements to handle and that
we preferred to disengage ourselves. Mrs. Matlack mentioned that a
dispatch had been received to the effect that a cousin of Charles was
prominently mentioned as a successor to Duvalier should the latter
be overthrown. She was of the opinion that the US government should
continue to "play ball" with Charles as a future asset in Haitian
affairs.
Distribution:
Orig - D/CIA
1 - New York Office
1 - Support (Stants)
1 - LA Branch
1 - Index (Control)
1 - Dep/Coll chrono
AFCsajkowski:acr
A. F. CZAJKOWSKI

