14-00000
104-10173-10135
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
I Joey's Coun'
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: LOGANOV, VALENTIN SERPEYEVICH
?
201-255412.
VOL.I
INCLUSIVE DATES:
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY: THIRD AGENCY DOCUMENTS
RETURNED REVIEWED BY (PRINT NAME) SIGNATURE OF REVIEWING OFFICIAL
DATE
RECEIVED
DATE
15 JULY
JIM KELLY
Jelly
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE
NUV, VALENT
TIN SERGEYEVICH 201-285412
aaari
14-00000
2
C
Contact Reports, etc., forwarded from the field.
14-00000
3
A
CB سن
D
Tp
CONTACT REPORT
+
SUBJECT:
LIROCKET-1
P-12,24:4
Files:
Copies
DATE OF MEETING: 27 June 1967
1. I met Subject from 1300-1430 on 27 June at the Capistrano Restaurant.
I paid him $2,000 M.N. as his salary for lay and June. The next meeting is
set for 25 July at 1300 at the Capistrano.
2. Subject conducted 14 classes at the Soviet Embassy during the reporting
periods
1 June
1530-1700-BEDRIN, GONCHARENKO, ROMANCHEIKO. Subject asked if
KAZANTSEY had gone out of town, as he had told Sübject he would probably
do. BEDRI relied without hesitation that KAZANTSEV had gone to Moscow
and wouldn't be back until about 15 June.
که
6 June
1-
1530-1700--- BEDRIN, GONCHARENKO, ROMANCHENKO. Toward the end of
class, BEDRIN said there were two men who wanted to speak with Subject after
class. Following class, two men Subject didn't recognize came in and
CONCHARENKO and ROMANCHENKO left. The two men were introduced as Vladimir
SOKOLOV and Pavel KOVALEV. BEDRIN explained briefly that they also were
interested in taking English lessons, and thereupon left with the comment
that he didn't believe he was needed. SOKOLOV was the first of the twosome
to speak, repeated that he and KOVALEV wished to take lessons, and then
turned things over to KOVALEV, who, he said, spoke better English than he.
KOVALEV proceeded to state that he had served in Washington, D.C. for three
years, had served an earlier tour in Mexico, and had been back in Mexico
for about a month. (KAZANTSEV later said he and KOVALEV had served in
P-9037 (p.1-4)
P-830
P-11712 (P.6)
P-9379 (1-4).
P-3171
P-8607 (pp.1-4)
P-810 (pp.1-4)
14-00000
S
Washington at the same time.) At one point KCALE referred to SOKOLOV
as his "chief." SOKOLOV interjected that he was leaving exico "sometime
this year" and wanted to brush up on his Eglish in preparation for the
4th year Shelish proficiency test he would have to take when he returned to
the USSR. Subjeet said that on the whole, he got the impression that KOVALST
was replacing SOKOLOV. A schedule of two classes a week, from 1800-1930-
on Tuesdays and Thursdays, was agreed upon. One of the two Soviets mentioned
that the funds for their lessons would come out of the military department.
1715-1830 - SOKOLOV and KOVALEV asked when Subject would suggest
they have their first lesson, and Subject replied that since KAZANTSEV was
away, they might as well begin immediately. The Soviets readily agreed..
Subject described KOVALET'S English as good. His grammar is a little better
than KAZANTSEV's, but he is not quite as fluent as KAZANTSEY. SOKOLOV'S
English is fairy fair, but he is decidedly behind KOVALEV and KAZANTSSY
in both grammar and fluency. Nevertheless, Subject feels SOKOLOV is good
enough to be in the same class as KOVALEV.
8. June
1530-1700-BEDRIN, CONCHARENKO, RONANHENTO.
1700-1830
13 Jung
KOVALEV and SOKOLOV.
1530-1700- BEDRIN, GONCHARENKO, ROMANCHENKO.
1700-1830 -- KOVALEV and SOKOLOV.
15 June
1520-1700 - Subject arrived at the Embassy early. BEDRIN came into
the Reception Room about 1520 and took Subject to the classroom (in which
there has always been a TV set). Three of the guards were sitting around
the TV watching the Salazar fight when Subject and BEDRIN entered. GONCHARENKO
2
came in about 1530 and ROMANCHE:KO about 15-0. All watched the fight
until it ended about 1550, after' which the class began.
1700-1830- KOVALEV and SOKOLOV.
20 June
1530-1700-BEDRIN, CONCHARENKO, ROMANCHENKO.
;
1700-1800 -- KAZANTSEV. KAZANTCEV began talking about his trip on
his own initiative. He said he left Mexico City on 30 May and arrived in
Moscow on 3 June. (He did not say when he returned to Mexico.) He gave no
reason for the trip, bút said he had "several conferences and meetings" in
Moscow. Subject interjected that he thought the trip might have had something
to do with the Middle East crisis, since it broke out just about the time
"KAZANTSEV left. KAZANTSEV laughed spontaneously at this idea and replied
that what he knew about the Middle East wouldn't do anyone any good. He
then went on to say he had spent his first weekend in Moscow with his son,
who shortly thereafter left for his summer job in "Siberia." He said he
spent the second weekend (10-11 Juno) with his daughter. The daughter,
according to KAZANTSEV, had planned to go "south" for a 2-3 week vacation in
early June, but postponed the vacation when she learned her father was
coming. (The implication, according to Subject, was that KAZANISEV's trip
came about fairly suddenly.) What KAZANTSEV was most interested in talking
about, however, was the fact he had unexpectedly had had to take his English
proficiency test in Moscow. He consequently set aside the last three days
of his stay for the test, which can often take that long. The first day
is taken up by an oral test, and if one passes that, he goes on to the written
test, which can take up to two days. KAZANTSEV, however, did so well on
the oral test that he was exempted from the written test. He said his
examiners gave him a "4" (on a 1-5 scale) and would have given him a "5"
except for the fact he hadn't read any books in English since his last
test. Che is supposed to read four or five books a year in English, according
3
to KAZANTSSY. In any event, KAZANTSEV was very happy with the outcomo
and with Subject's work in preparing him for the test. In fact, he said
that although he had originally started taking lessons from Subject only
to prepare for the test, he was so satisfied with his progress that he
intended to stay on with Subject despite the fact the test was behind him.
1500-1930-KOVALSV and SOKOLOV.
22 June
1530-1700 KAZANTSEV took the first hour and a half. He merely
said BEDRIN, CONCHARSKO, and ROMANCHENKO would not attend class that day. :
1700-1930- KOVALEV and SOKOLIN.
3. KOLEV and SOKOROY. SOKOLOV is the more simpatico of the two.
While KOVALEV can be very pleasant, he seems to have an antagonistic
strain and occasionally challenges Subject's teaching with: "That isn't
the way we do it in our courses, etc. Sometimes, in fact, the disputes
on methods, points of grammar, etc. have become rather heated. On these
occasions, SOKOLOV has, usually stepped in more or less on Subject's side
and cooled things off. At their second meeting, KOVALEV asked Subject directly
what his views were on the Middle East crisis, Subject türned the question
back on KOVALEV by saying he would frankly be more interested in KOVALEVIS
אמאdeas, as he was sure KOVALEV was much better informed about the situation
than he. KOVALEV backed away this time, claiming he dièn't have much infor-
mation either, but at a later class both he and SOKOLOV parroted the Soviet
line about the crisis--Israel was the aggressor, etc. On another occasion
when the Middle East was again the topic, Subject referred to (what he recalled
as) President Truman's post-World War II proposal to internationalize both
the Suez and Panama canals. KOVALEV immediately objected to this idea,
although he gave no indication of ever having thought about it before.
4
14-00000
7
KOVALEZ. Subject said he mentioned KOWALEV and SOKOLOV to his
wife, and she immediately recalled KOVALEY is one of her students at the
Nextein-North Aclean Institute back in the late 50's or early 60's..
She told Subject that he had been frienils with a number of people at the
Institute (students and teachers). One of these, she recalled, was Bill
KCASTEL
CASTELAZO, a U.S. citizen who then and still teaches English and Spanish
at the Institute. CASTELAZO is about 35. He is Arong 20-25 persons
who? or 8 years ago studied Russian at the Institute when it was tought
for a brief time by a Russian woman. g Subject's wife told Subject
that KOVALEV and CASTELAZO had been very friendly and that KOVALEV had
invited him to the Soviet Embassy at least twice. CASTELAZO told Subject's
wife that after one of his visits to the Soviet Embassy, he was approached
by somoone from the American Embassy and asked to inform on the Soviets.
CASTALAZO said he was repelled by the idea of being an informer and
implied that he hadn't cooperated with the American. Subject said he had
not known about CASTELAZO's acquaintance with KOVALEV, but had known that
CASTELAZO had studied Russian and had had him to his apartment along with
ROMANCHENKO, BEDRIN, and CONCHARENKO for his 1 July 1966 Demione Dominion
Day-party.
!
5. Subject subsequently mentioned to KOVALEV that his wife remembered.
having him as a student during his previous tour. Subject also remarked
that his wife had mentioned that KOVALEV and his (Subject's) friend CASTELAZO
had been friends. KOVALEV replied without any embarrassment that he didn't
remember Subject's wife, but did remember CASTELÁZO. KOVALEV asked Subject
to give CASTELAZO his rogards the next time he saw him.
6. Other than a 1960 reference to "Guillermo CASTELAZO" as a 20-93
year old teacher at the Mexican-North American Institute and an author
of one of the Institute's text books, there are no Station traces on
5
H CASTEL
D. LOVALE!!
شان شد
the Cistalizo in question. (See 50-6-55/3. CR of 13 Sept. 190.)
7/LOGIHOY. When Subject was leaving the Embassy on 15 June (about 1835).
he met Gov in front of the Reception Room. They talked, chiefly about
sports for about 15 minutes. LOGICO said skiing and speed skating were
two of his favorite sports, and that his greatest sporting interest in
Mexico was playing tennis. Subject said that LOGINOV seemed to be an
avid sportsman. LOGINOV said that he was going to Moscow on vacation toward
the end of July. No reference was made to Subject teaching LOGOV's son
English when the LOGINOVS return from vacation, but Subject assumes this
is still LOGICOV's wish.
:-
3. Subject to Rendermans Make Tapes At Embassy Prior to Class. At
one of their classes after KAZANTSEV's return from Moscow, Subject and
KAZANTSEV discussed Subject's making tapes for use in connection with his
three Engassy classes. It was agreed that Subject would come to the Embassy
half an hour or so early once a week to make the tapes. He was to begin
on 27 June (the day of our meeting). Subject did not yet know where he
was to do the recording, whether he would be left alone, "etc.
9. Subject said he was considering having another Dominion Day Party
on 1 July to which hè would invite his Soviet students. I encouraged the
ide: and told him I'd pick up the tab.
: :
:
10. The week of 19 June the wife of President DIAZ Ordas called the
Director of the Instituto Irlandes and asked if he could recommend a tutor
for a nephew of hers. The director replied that the Instituto had a good
English teacher and that although he was very busy, he would ask him if he
would be willing to take on the nephew. The director communicated the above
to Subject, and Subject gave the Director a list of the few hours he had
free. The director told Subject he would call Mrs. Diaz Ordas back and
would infora Subject if any of the hours were suitable. As of 27 June,
;
Subject hadn't heard further from the director.
•
S3/LL
14-00000
9
10
LOGINOV handwriting sample, received 16 June 1967, from LIRENO
Valentís Login
15-60-55
Cousul
P-11712
14-00000
11
シ
3
CONTACT REPORT
SUBJECT:
DATE OF MEETING:
BECRET
LICOZY-5
15 June 1967
1. I met with Subject at the Del Paseo from 0900 to 1000.
The next meeting is for 18 July at 0830 at the same place.
8. On 8 June LOGINOV dropped by Subject's office to leave
two tickets for the Bolshoy Ballet performance on 11 Juno.
Subject invited LOGINOV and his wife for dinner and LOGINOV
accepted for 13. June. (COMMENT: LIENVOY reports their confirming
this date on 12 June). Subject said the tickets were used by
his wife and son.
3. The guests on 13 June were LOGINOV and wife, William do
Mier (P-5552), manager of KLM in Mexico and Gustavo ORTIZ Hernan
(P-10971). ORTIZ WAs Mexico's first Ambassador to Israel and 18
very pro-Israel. He recently retired from the Mexican Foreign
Service. Hie last job was Ambassador to Chile. He is 57 years
old and apparently a good friend of Subject's. Subject invited
ORTIZ because he knew that LOGINOV has been interested in public
opinion in Mexico about the recent Israel-Arab war. Subject had
been only able to give LOGINOV the opinions of Mexican Jews and
he wanted LOGINOV to talk to a real Mexican. The doock was slightly,
loaded since Subject knew that ORTIZ is an Israeli partisan.
Bubject purposely avoided the subject but it was not long before
ORTIZ asked LOGINOV about the Soviet position on the matter.
LOGINOV answered with a banality about the USSR only wanting peace.
ORTIZ then unloaded on LOGINOV for about half an hour. He told
him that he had been in Israel as ambassador and had seen both
sides. If the Soviets were interested in peace, why didn't they
help the miserable and diseased Arabs with medicine, hospitals,
job training, agricultural aid, etc? This is what they need,
not tanks and jets. The Soviets are the real aggressors by
araing the Arabs and egging them on. And what fools the Sovs
are since the Arabs will never learn to operate any equipment,
much less sophisticated stuff. Soviet hypocrisy is obvious to
everybody. FEDORENKO's performance at the UN was shameful, etc.
LOGINOV never answered a word, Subject later reported the above
to the Israeli Ambaseador who was pleased since ORTIZ is not a
Jew and he is sure the above would be reported to Moscow.
4. LOGINOV caid he will leave on 23 July for vacation in
the USSR. Subject saw Mrs. LOGINOV for the second time. Since
her Spanish is extremely limited, she did not participate in
general conversation. However, she handled herself well and did
not seem in the least ill at ease. In a side conversation she
told Subject that they have a fifteen year old daughter who is
living with her mother. She said that she has known LOGINOV
since the age of six as neighbors in Moscow. Finally, she said
that she is a chemical engineer.
5. I asked if Subject had talked to Hiriam AVILA Kate (-581)
again about her contacts with our Babassy. He said be hadn't.
I asked what advice he had given her. He said that he had told
her to be truthful with the Americans and to be careful with
LOGINOV.
Francis J. COIGNE
P-10971
P-581
FILE: P-2712 (P-11712 P-5352
P-10971
P-581
14-00000
12
LITENBE-1
IA JUN G7
1630
Dinnow jed
F
On the 9 May I went with my wife to the reception given by the
ambassador of Checoslovaquia on the occasion of htior National Day.
The party took place in the garden where there were a couple of
tables seating about ten persons each. Most of the people seating
at the tables were from embassies behind the Iron curtain, or
local supporters of the extreme left such as Cordero Amador, the
painter Marin-Busqued, the art critic Margarita Nelken, Ruth Rivera
etc. The Soviets were there headed by Amkuxaragm Bazarov and
Boris
Kazanteev, present also by the name of/Tchmikov, Valentin Loguinov,
Tchmikov is a young man, about thirty five, speake very good
Spanish and has a rather nice wife. He invitedus to attend the
exhibition of a film, a russian film at the embassy the next
day, he also whahwe were leaving said that we had to go to his
house soon and have a real russian dinner. This kind of invitation
is most unusual. I do not remember any other sovietico suggesting:
such a thing.
In the party there were the usual diplomatic crowd which
at ends parties of representation's behind the Iron Curtain, Max
Wery, the Belginn ambassador and his wife, the French ambassador
and his wife, the French Counsellor la Tour du Pin and his wife,
the architect Lopez Malo who is one of the directors of the
Comité Organizador de los Juegos Olimpicos, the italian ambassador
and one of his daughters, the Urüguayan ambassador, the Chilean
ambassador and Enrique Cobo del Campo the cousellor of the same
embassy, the cuban ambassador Joaquin Kernandez Armas with whom
we talked about Venezuela and told me that it was an stupid thing
to accuse a country of trying to invade another country with half
a dozen men. The chechs had plenty of beer brought checoslova-
A
r
COPIES MADE
:
cy
to P-62.35
quia but mixed it with just as much mexican beer if you were not
careful. The Brazilian ambassador was there, Guillermo Gimenes
Ramirez the charge of Costa Rica, Gonzalo Almeida Urrutia, the
ambassador from Ecuador, from the Foreign Office, Muiñoz Zapata and
Flores Tejada. I do not remember seing anybody from the US, but
I arrived somewhat late, Kai Somerto the ambassador from Finland
was present and so was the mayor general Natahn Aferi from Ghana,
the ambassador was most friendly as well as Jan Hant the commercial
counsellor and Jiri Sumatran Svestka the second secretary in
charge o the consulat.
Next day we went to the Soviet embassy for the exhibition of
a fil whose title I think was the Father of the Soldier, a rather
childish film but that brought tears to the eyes of some of the
embassy wives who attended. There was an small group of people,
including tonse army officers from the Secretary de la Defensa,
and miral Azanar Cetina, subsecretario de marina, and amiral
Otal Briceño, who after a long illness has now some new post in
Marina. All the Soviet staff was present, there were two or three
cuban including Curvello. There was a change, the doors of the
embassy were wide open and there was no question by the people
at the nexm outside door, inside Frygov and other fellow received
the visitors. There was as usual plenty of vodka, xaxmm small
eats but no caviar, both thing were served before and after the
exhibition of the film film.
On the 17th of may we went to a reception for the National day
of Noruega. They have a beautiful house in Monte Carpatos which
had been built for the embassy along their norweigian style; the
new ambassador is a tall gaurt, strange man, there were not many
people because there was a diplomatic lunch at Relaciones and
white film of the Opympics to Ram rez Vasquez. No Indian around.
No Greekreither. Chacha Valdes, formerly de Lanz Duret, with
her new husband, licenciado Lozano. She is the owner of Universal.
He was nobody until he married, now he is a well known jurist.
Prancisco Agüera Cenarro, the director of Revista Internacional,
trying to impress the French ambassador with the fact that he
had printed an editorial on Israel if his magazine. Revista
Internacional has a mfculation of about fivehundred copies, but
gives
uera a good ten thousand pesos a month.
I was a fairly good party as far as dilomatic perties
go, but sterile in results. Nobody appeared to kamwerxn worry
very much about the war in the East, and some epple like the
Paraguayn and the Tobias Eguizabal had the idea that everything
had been prepared in advance by the United States and the URSS.
That there had been a meeting in which the question had been
atteled.
Loguinov called me to the office to tell me he had tickets
for me and my wife for the Bolshoi ballet for Sunday night. We
had been unable to secure anything at the office.
14-00000
15
five
On Sunday 11 June, Valentin Lofuinov was able to obtain for us
two good tickets for the Ballet Bolshoi at Bellas Artes and
afterwards we went to have something to eat at Lady Baltimore in
Madero Street. Very few people were there, which is not surprising
in view of the bad quality of their food and poor service. But
it was the nearest spot for a quick bite.
Loguinov was very much interested in knowing what my US
friends thought about the situation in the Middle East and what
they would do about it. He was insistent about the possible help
that the US would give to Israel, he said that the US had already
given Israel a considerable amount of ammunition and planes, and
specially money, the URSS had to give some help to the arabs in
view of the help given to Israel. According to him there was not
the slighest doubt that Israel had been the agressor. The URSS
would never consent to any territorial gains by Israel..
During our conversation about food, specially about seafood
he let it be know that he had been in Mazatlán several times.
He said that everything which had taken place in the Middle
Fast had been plotted in advance by the US and Israel.
14-00000
16
SECRET
CONTACT REPORT
SUBJECT:
DATE OF MEETING:
LICOZY-5
3 June 1967
1. After a long hiatus, I called Subject on ca 14 May and
learned he was out of the country. I called him again on 6 June
and we made a date for 8 June. The meeting was in the breakfast
room of the Del Paseo Hotel from 0810 to 0915. The next meeting
is at the same place at 0830 on 15 June.
2. Subject was all excited about the Israel/Arab conflict
and we spent the best part of the meeting discussing it.
3. He said that LOGINOV called him on 3 June and pressed
for a lunchoon date the same day. Subject put him off until 8 June.
LOGINOV wanted news on the local Jewish reaction, was everybody
behind the Jews, was money being contributed, etc. Subject who
was madder than hell about Sovicot support of the Arabs gave him:
holl and to direct questions got the admissions from LOGINOV
that the Israelis vere acting in self-defense and that the
Americans and British were not providing the Israelis air cover.
LOGINOV mentioned that he would go to the USSR on home leave in.
July.
4. On 6 June Miriam AVILA Kats, who is also very excited
sbout the war and who told Subject that she had gone to the
Israeli Embassy to volunteer to serve in Israel, told Subject
that when she returned home on the evening of 5 June, LOGINOV
was waiting for her on the street. His purpose vas the same as
wanting to see Bubject, to pump her on local reactions to the war.
She also gave LOGINOV hell.
5. She then told Subject that in Holy Week she had been
called to the American Embassy and had been asked about her contact
with LOGINOV. She said that she had seen the same American
(no name given) about two weeks ago. She then told Subject that
LOGINOV had asked her to introduce him to "one of her progressive
friends" or "someone in the U.S. Embassy" as a return for the
favor of issuing a visa to Dr. Yuriy KUTLER.
6. The above is a capsule account of her relationship with
LEVENDERIS. I played innocent until I got the whole story but
finally admitted that we had talked to her when he asked, "if it
wasn't you, who?" I told him that AVILA had notides that Subject
was in contact with us and had in fact worried that her activities
(future) might hurt him which she was definitely against.
7. It appears that AVILA told Subject about us because of
LOGINOV's appearance on 5 June and her emotional state about the
war. I will discuss this further with Subject at the next meeting,
particularly what advice he has or will give her about cooperating
with us.
Francis J. COIGNE
FILE:
P-2712
P-11712
P-581
SECRET
14-00000
17
DOI 14. June 1967
SOURCE: LIHABIT
14 June 67
LOGINOV (P-11/12) visited the Czech Embassy this day. He was driving
diplomatic license plate car 19 DA. He was there from 1214 to 1238 hours.
gaf
gule P-11712
14-00000
18
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
Contact with BESABER, 24 May 1967
1. Operational - Per telcon arranged noot at BESABER's
hotel room at Del Pasoo (204). Met from 1830-2030, 24 May.
BEBABER will call 30 May or 1 June to arrange next meet.
2. Fisances - Replanished BESABER's revolving fund.
3. Substance
a. Re SOSWIRL - As requested at last meet BESABER turned
in bio data on girlfriend he had talked to 8GSWIRL operator about.
(Beo attached note from operator). No traces. He will turn in
at next best his version of what he told her. He is rost upset
by this matter, particularly since I had told him that Headquartere
wanted to drop him. I reiterated that he was on probation.
b. CHHYKROV and LOGINOV
(P-6235) (P-11712)
1). On 20 May CHMYKHOV and LOGINOV arrived at
BESABER's plant at about 1400. Lwas driving a brownish Chevy
Impala, 34-DA. Lung interested in seeing the house that BESABER
had located for the Soviets. He said they wanted a house for
three, possibly four months (starting 1 June) and could easily
opend up to $6,000 MN per month.
3). BESABER could not leave the plant, but put them
in touch with a Sra. LARA who took them around to seven houses,
one of which they liked. They returned to BESABER's plant at
about 1700, eat around for about an hour, leaving because they
said the couriers were coming in that night and they had a lot
of work to do.
3).
(Couriers did arrive that night).
CHMYKEOV drank heavily (scotch) but did not
show any effect; LOGINOV didn't even finish one Scotch and water.
4). L'eaid he would probably return to Cuernavaca in
a few days to sign the lease on the house and would look BESABER
up. BESABER told L that he had a friend with a tennis court and
in a few weeks when the friend returned to Mexico he (BESABER) would
arrange a day of tennis.
5). L did most of the talking although C was pleasant,
told a number of good jokes (in poor Spanish) and generally impressed
BESABER as boinga pleasant type, not "pesado," as he assesses L.
c. Re COIGNE's request and as a follow-up to LIKAYAK/3's
report of 28 April 1967 re Lorenzo CARDENAS (P-5409), I asked
BESABER if he knew of a house of prostitution at Dr. Manuel
Ugarte 1C3 A. He did not, but will check it out through the
doormen of several hotels.
COPIES MADE
FILE:
P-3777
Phineas F. SLINKARD
P-5409
SECRET
1-SB
INGING 12
CE. CNMYROV P1-335
14-00000
19
CARDED
Gloria *PINTO
Contact and apparently good
friend of & XXESXXEX LOGINOV
of Soviet Embassy.
75-
93-
LWENVOY
Entrada.- 1231 hrs.- MF GLORIA PINTO pregunta por
LOGUINOV, HD dice que no esta. GLORIA pide le digan que le
11ame al 23-62-85.- 93
Salida al 23-62-83.- 1239 hrs. LOGUINOV suluon a GLORIA
PINTO, Esta dice que lo llamaba hace rato para darle las
gracias de parte do su cuñada por la visa que le dió. LOGUINOV
que está bien, GLORIA tambien le llama porque RUTHI va a ir
a fin de semana a Valle de Bravo y lo invitan a ir. LOGUINOV
no puede porque al domingo salo un compañero a Moscú y lo
tiene quo is a despedir, poro puede ser para la otra semana.
GLORIA que para ol dia 27 os la Copa Davis, y tal vez no
puedan ir. LOGUINOV que ontonces ya será despues. GLORIA comenta
que ALFONSO va a estar a las cinco en el café "El Jujuy".
LOGUINOV va a tratar de estar alli un rato para saludarlos.
-
GLORIA pide paso por ella y de ulli se van juntos., LOGUINOV
no tiene micho tiempo parque está haciendo las 50 visas de ...
.. la Seleccida Mexicana de Futbol, pero va a tratar de
estar a las cinco en el card, GLORIA que está bien.-144-
156 055
17 MAYO 1967
P-11712
14-00000
20
CONTACT REFORT
SURJECT:
Niriam AVILA Katz
DATE OF HEATING: 11 May 1967
P-581
1. My last meeting with Subject was on 23 March, at
which time she agreed to provide information on LOGINOV
obtained during their normal business contact and any further
zocial contact initiated by him. She was to call me after
their next date or any other significant contact she had with
him. Since I had not heard from her, I called her at her
apartment about 2115 on 11 May. I apologized for calling so
late, but said I had just got out of work and had a package.
for her I had brought back from the States which I wanted
to deliver before the contents got stale. Could I drop over
that night or perhaps another evening. Subject immediately
recognized the "package" as the Benson and Hedges cigarettes
I had promised her, gently protested, and then told me she
was not feeling well, but the doctor had told her she had
to eat, and it so happened she was just going out for a bite
when I called. I consequently suggested we have dinner together,
which we did from 21115-1215 at the Gondola. Afterwards, we
went around the corner to her apartment for a nightcap until
0200.
こ
2. Subject had lost 8 or 10 pounds and looked a bit thin
and not as attractive as I had remembered her. She told me
she was simoly working too hard and not eating and sleeping
properly. I had some fear that she might have had come second
Fika ces
P-11712
P-1573 (pp. 2-4) P-2712 (pp. 4-5)
thoughts in the seven weeks since she had agreed to cooperate,
but it proved unfounded. She this time was relaxed from the
start, was very friendly, and seemed to on joy the opportunity
to get out. (She later told me in her apartment that she didn't
go out much, liked to spend her evenings at home reading,
listening to records, tending to her dwarf trees, etc.)