119-10021-10413
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: DOS
RECORD NUMBER : 119-10021-10413
RECORDS SERIES : INR FILES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : FBI
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
Date: 09/20/93
Page:1
ORIGINATOR : DOS
FROM : CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUB
TO: MEMBERS OF SUBCOMMITTEE ON CASTRO
TITLE : REPORT FOR JULY - AUGUST ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO COMBAT CASTRO-COMMUNIST S
DATE: 09/30/63
PAGES: 23
SUBJECTS : SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
DOCUMENT TYPE: MEMORANDUM
CLASSIFICATION :S
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/09/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
DOD AND CIA REVIEW
COMMENTS: Draft subcommittee report attached.
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 1
*
***
***
**
*W*
*I*
*T*
*H*
*D*
*R*
*A*
*W*
*A*
*L*
**
*C*
*A*
*R*
*D*
**
***
**
September 30, 1963
TO: Members of Subcommittee on Castro-Communist
Subversion.
FROM: Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion
SUBJECT: Report for July - August on Actions Taken to
Combat Castro-Communist Subversion.
Attached is a draft of the Subcommittee's report for
July and August on actions taken to counteract Castro-
communist subversion in the hemisphere. The draft has been
prepared on the basis of the material which you furnished
with certain modifications. The CIA man will note that I
have corrected from his submission the sets of action taken
and placed these in the body of the report. The intelligence
information contained in the submission I have made into a
I think it is very
useful to have the intelligence
data form part of the report. I request that in the future
the CIA member prepare his submission in two parts.
May I have your comments on the draft by close of
business October 1, 1963.
Copies to: CIA
DOD
USA
FAR
Justice
Mr. Webster (2)
Col. Haig (2)
Mr. Wagley (1)
Mr. Hart (1)
Mr. Geoghegan (1)
62-108552-5
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 2
DRAFT
SECRET
2 of copies
GROUP I
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
1. Control of Travel to and from Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
a. Developed highly useful information on frequency
of Cuban "chartered" flights to Brazil, names and nationalities
of passengers and crew, and lax measures of control followed
by Brazilian authorities. Transmitted this information to
station chiefs in the Latin American countries of the non-
Brazilians travelling on these flights.
b. Maintained close watch over travel to and from
Cuba. See Annex B for table of known travel of Latin Americans
during July and August.
c. As a result of information furnished by him by the
CIA Station in Buenos Aires and with the Station's urging, the
Argentine Minister of Interior indicated that he would make
every effort to prevent Argentine delegates from attending the
International Union of Architects Congress in Havana.
d. At the urging of the CIA Station and the Embassy
the Bolivian Minister of Interior issued in mid-July an order
prohibiting the granting of travel permits to Cuba on other
bloc countries to Bolivian nationals.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 3
2-108553-5
SECRET
ENCLOSURE
SECRET
-2-
e. Partly as a result of the efforts of the CIA
station in Santiago, the Government of Chile prohibited the
entry into Chile of organizers of the Cuban sponsored Second
Latin American Youth Congress, which had been scheduled to take
place in Santiago in August. This was one of the factors which
led to postponement of theCongress.
f. After considerable prodding by the CIA Station
and the Embassy the Minister of Public Security of Costa Rica
presented legislative proposals to the Costa Rican Assembly
which will require all persons intending to travel to Communist
countries to have their travel approved by a newly created
Costa Rican security agency.
g. CIA Station in Mexico City developed information
concerning the clandestine arrival of passengers in Vera Cruz
on Cuban merchant ships. Efforts are being made to obtain more
information and to encourage stricter controls by the Mexican
authorities.
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Conakry to try to persuade
Guinean authorities to deny use of airport facilities by flights
on Habana-Moscon route. These efforts achieved a temporary
withholding of permission for future regular flights, at least
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 4
SECRET
-3-
until such time as the Soviets develop their own refueling facilities
at Conakry.
b. Instructed Embassy Rio to approach Brazilian
authorities to express our deep concern at the growing frequency
of Cuban non-scheduled flights to Brazil and request their
cooperation in curbing them. Also instructed our Embassies
in several Latin American countries to work with CIA station
chiefs in furnishing the names of nationals of those countries
travelling on these flights to local authorities and urging
them: (1) to institute tighter controls on their own citizens
travelling to Cuba, and (2) to express their concern to the
government of Brazil over the use of Brazil as a way station
for transporting subversives.
c. As a result of representations made to the British
government about Cuban flights to the Cayman Islands carrying
Latin American subversives, the British developed an administrative
scheme which will effectively prohibit the use of British
Caribbean dependencies by Cubana as transit points for passengers.
The British intend to require transit visas of passengers passing
through their areas, and to reject applications for such visas
except in certain special cases. Persons not possessing visas
would be prevented from leaving their aircraft, or would be
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 5
SECRET
-4-
returned to their point of origin.
d. Instructed Embassy Mexico City on August 29 to
inform the Mexican airline CA that the United States is
opposed to a proposal that CMA operate charter flights to carry
refugees from Havana to Central America. CMA, as a result,
stated that they had no intention of proceeding further with
this project.
e. Instructed U.S. Missions in Curacao and the Hague
to investigate a report that KLM was planning to renew its
scheduled Curacao-Habana flights and to reiterate U.S. opposition
to resumption of air service to Cuba. KLM assured our Embassy
that there is no plan to initiate service, scheduled or non-
scheduled, to Habana.
f. Instructed Embassy Ottawa to express our strong
objections to a proposal that a Cubana charter flight pick up
a second group of U.S. students in Montreal to fly them to Cuba.
The flight was not authorized.
g. Instructed Consulate Georgetown to investigate
Cubana approaches to secure flight facilities. Mission reported
on August 1 that the Governor had no knowledge of any talks
between the B.G. Ministry of Communications and the Cuban Govern-
ment regarding landing rights for Cubana planes. The Governor
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 6
SECRET
-5-
indicated his intention to inquire further and to keep us
advised. London reported that neither the Cuban nor the British
Guiana Governments had raised the issue of landing rights with
H.M.G.
h. Urged the governments of Mexico, Canada, Jamaica
and the Netherlands to refuse to assist the Cuban government
in its efforts to find a short route for return of the 58 American
students who illegally travelled to Cuba. Also informed Pan
American Airways that we were opposed to a Cuban request for
a PAA charter flight to fly the students from Habana to New York.
i. Instructed our missions at Port of Spain and
Barbados on several occasions to approach these governments to
express the concern of the U.S. at indications of Cuban interest
in the use of their aviation facilities.
Embassy Port of Spain discussed with the Foreign Secretary
of Trinidad various legal moves available that would enable
GOTT to control movements of aircraft within their territory,
citing examples of such controls instituted by Mexico, Canada
and Ireland. He indicated receptiveness to the proposal that
the list of suggestions be made available to the aviation officials
concerned.
j. During a previous reporting period Embassy Santiago
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 7
SECRET
-6-
urged the government of Chile to refuse visas to Cuban delegates
to a preparatory meeting planning for the II Latin American
Youth Congress scheduled for August in the Chilean capital.
Inability of Cuban delegates to obtain Chilean visas for this
meeting is one of the contributing factors to the Cuban sponsors
announcing during August that the meeting had been postponed.
k. Sent general instructions to our missions in countries
which participate in the International Union of Architects asking
them to urge the cooperation of governmental authorities in
preventing or discouraging the attendance of their citizens to
the VII UIA Congress in Habana, September 29-October 4, 1963.
Followed this up with instructions to individual posts to try
where feasible to dissuade architects from free world countries
from serving on the jury for the selection of a Day of Pigs
monument.
l. Urged Canadian Government to block a plan to
commence food parcel shipments to Cuba, on a commercial basis,
that would have required the establishment of scheduled weekly
charter flights by Canadian planes.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 8
SECRET
-7-
2. Control of Movement of Cuban Propaganda
Central Intelligence Agency
1. Responding to the urging of the CIA Station police
of the State of Guanabara seized large quantities of propa-
ganda brought into Brazil by passengers on the special Cubana
flights. For example, some 50 pounds of printed propaganda
was taken from the various passengers who arrived on the 16
August Cubana flight.
3. Control of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas and Arms
Department of Defense
a. Continued surveillance of the area surrounding Cuba
during the month of July at the same rate and with the same
emphasis as prior to 1 July 1963.
b. Continued to maintain U.S. Forces, primarily from
within the Atlantic Command, available to assist other Caribbean
governments in the interception of suspicious craft in
territorial waters, as might be requested. No such requests were
received from any other government during the period covered by
this report. However, U.S. Forces did keep track of the
location of the Soviet merchant freighter MITCHURINSK, which
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 9
SECRET
-8-
was suspected of carrying subversives and arms from Cuba to
British Guiana in mid-July. MITCHURINSK was under U.S.
surveillance from its departure from Havana until United
Kingdom forces assumed the task of keeping this ship under
surveillance upon its approach to Georgetown, British Guiana.
Subsequently, British police search of MITCHURINSK in British
Guiana waters revealed nothing of a suspicious nature.
Control Intelligence Agency
At the repeated urging of the CIA Station in Lima
the Peruvian Government late in August published a new anti-
terrorists law providing a penalty of no less than five years
imprisonment for persons who participate in guerrilla activities
or in the illegal manufacture of weapons or explosives.
The Peruvian National Intelligence Service is working
on a lead furnished by the CIA Station in Lima concerning a
200 ton vessel reportedly involved in arms traffic.
Department of State
Instructed our Consulate General in Georgetown to
investigate reports that commercial cargoes (which could conceal
illicit arms traffic out of Cuba) had developed between British
Guiana and Cuba. Investigations to date have been negative.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 10
SECRET
-9-
4. Control of Transfer of Funds
Department of State
Cooperated with the Foreign Assets Control Office of
the Treasury Department in developing blocking controls with
respect to Cuba which went into effect on July 9, 1963.
5. Strengthening of Counter-Insurgency Capabilities
Department of Defense
a. Continued the installation of military communica-
tions facilities in Latin America. Operational dates for the
multi-channel radio stations to be installed in Managua,
Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa, Honduras have been delayed to 15
October 1963 and 15 December 1963, respectively because of new
engineering and contractual requirements. Negotiations are
continuing with Colombia and Ecuador for installation of U.S.
military radio facilities. Completion of a new commercial trans-
isthmian cable in the Panama Canal Zone within the coming month
is expected to improve military communications within the
United States and the Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern Command.
b. Continued the surveillance of Cuba by U.S. Forces,
reporting as before to U.S. commanders, organizations and agencies.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 11
SECRET
-10-
Reports of surveillance have been disseminated to all who have
a requirement to know.
c. Established a 24 hour per day, 7 days per week duty
watch at the U.S. Military Groups in the Caribbean countries in
conjunction with implementation of the military alerting system.
Continued efforts to staff the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence
Center with properly cleared, trained personnel (this center is
the military focal point for relaying information concerning
the movement of subversives). Filled, partially, the authorized
billets in the U.S. Southern Command Intelligence Center and
took under consideration the problem of an increase in the billet
structure in the Center. The Commander-in-Chief, U.S. Southern
Command together with his intelligence officer visited Honduras
and Nicaragua and determined that no significant problems existed
which would interfere with effective operations in those
countries.
d. Action previously initiated by the Commander, U.S.
Naval Forces, Southern Command (COMUSNAVSO) to establish a Small
Craft Inspection and Training Team (SCIATT) as a contribution to
the Caribbean Surveillance System is progressing satisfactorily.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 12
SECRET
-11-
Permanent assignment of U.S. Coast Guard personnel to SCIATT
in the Canal Zone has been approved and the U.S. Coast Guard
has taken appropriate implementing actions.
e. During the period of this report, the SCIATT con-
ducted an on-the-job training course at Puntarenas, Costa
Rica. Training was given to 13 members of the Guardia Civil
of Costa Rica who were either newly assigned to the 40 foot
Coast Guard utility boats (CCUBs) or were to be assigned as
replacement crew members.
f. A quarterly inspection and evaluation of the CCUBs
provided other Central American countries was conducted during
the period 17 to 31 August by a mobile training team (MTT)
made up of SCIATT personnel.
g. Continued efforts to improve the internal security
of Latin American armies through the provision of Intelligence
Advisors. Presently there are such advisors assigned to 14
Latin countries, emphasizing counterintelligence and counter-
subversion.
h. During the reporting period MTTS conducted training
in counterinsurgency for the armed forces of Colombia, Bolivia,
Venezuela, Peru and El Salvador.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 13
SECRET
-12-
i. Civic Action MTTS were sent to Guatemala, Bolivia,
Colombia, El Salvador, Jamaica and Ecuador.
6. Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Subversion
Central Intelligence Agency
CIA Stations throughout Latin America continued in a
great majority of countries to furnish to the local internal
security organizations with whom they are in liaison informa-
tion concerning travelers to and from Cuba, as well as such
information as came to CIA's attention concerning the movement
of funds, arms and propaganda material. In many instances, the
furnishing of information to the internal security service by
the CIA Station was paralleled by the furnishing of similar
information to the foreign office by the Ambassador or his
representative. The response to this information has varied
greatly. The Central American countries, in general, began to
pay attention to the information and take action on it. At the
other extreme, the Brazilian Government during the reporting period
showed little inclination
to follow up on the information.
Department of State
a. Reiterated to the Foreign Minister of Peru our
interest in having the facts of the Puerto Maldonado incident
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 14
SECRET
-13-
brought to the attention of the OAS, and urged that this action
be taken as soon as possible.
b. Urged the Government of Guatemala to submit evidence
of communist activity to the OAS.
7. Surveillance of Cuban Diplomatic, Commercial and Cultural
Missions.
Central Intelligence Agency
(To be filled in by Mr. Wheelan)
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 15
SECRET
-14-
Department of State
Instructed Embassy La Paz to follow up closely on
charges of involvement of Cuban mission in internal politics
of Bolivia, and, at the Embassy's discretion, to point out to
Bolivian officials the opportunity for a possible break in
relations with Cuba. Embassy La Paz was not able to press
for a break when the evidence of Cuban intervention did not
prove to be as conclusive as originally reported.
8. Other Special Actions
Department of State
a. Obtained action by the OAS on July 3 on the Lavalle
Committee Report transmitting the document to the governments
and urging them to implement its specific and general recom-
mendations contained therein as soon as possible.
b. Through Embassy Managua informed the Nicaraguan
Government of the matters which we wanted to have considered
during the informal meeting of the Ministers of Security and
Interior of the Isthmian countries held in Managua, August
26-23 in preparation for the second formal meeting of the
Managua Security Conference countries later this year.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 16
SECRET
-15-
c. Reassured President Schick of Nicaragua in the
most emphatic terms that the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty did not
mean that our attitude toward Castro has altered in the
slightest, and stressed our interest in seeing steady progress
by all the Isthmian countries in implementing the recommenda-
tions of the Managua Security Conference to block Cuban
subversive efforts.
d. Explained in detail the nature of the Cuban threat
and the related policy objectives of the U.S., during conversa-
tion in London and in Washington with Mr. Adam Watson, newly
appointed British Ambassador to Cuba.
United States Information Service
e. The Agency's press service during the reporting
period transmitted 12 articles, commentaries, and backgrounders
on its wireless file service to USIA posts throughout Latin
America for placement in the local newspapers and the Voice of
America Spanish broadcasts to Latin America carried a total of
23 commentaries and features on the subject of Cuban-based
subversion in addition to the regular reporting of developments
in the hourly newscasts.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 17
SECRET
-16-
f. In response to standing Agency instructions to give
special attention to developments related to Cuba-based
subversion, USIS posts in Latin America were prompt in reporting
incidents and in providing editorial comments from the Latin
American press, all of which was used in the Agency's radio and
press output.
The main developments treated in the Agency's radio and
press coverage included Castro's July 26 speech urging revolu-
tions in Latin America, the discovery of terrorist weapons
factories in Guayaquil, the Ecuadorean Vice President's accusation
of Cuban responsibility for terrorism, the statement by State
Department Press Officer Richard Phillips that "potential
subversive agents" from Cuba to the Caribbean area were passing
through Gran Cayman, the expulsion of a Bolivian youth leader
for receiving funds from Cuba, Castro-trained terrorists in
Honduras, Bolivian protests against meddling by the Cuban Embassy
in the miner's strike. A Voice of America roving reporter in
Latin America provided several reports of information on the
subversion picture in countries he visited.
g. In support of the Agency's effort on Cuban-based
subversion, the publications center in Mexico began work on
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 18
SECRET
-17-
three pamphlets during the period based on Castro's report of
his visit to the Soviet Union (showing that he contradicted
himself in some of his extravagant claims of Soviet progress),
the losses suffered by Cuban labor under Castro, and the fate
of political prisoners in Cuba. When completed, these pamphlets
will be reproduced and distributed in quantity throughout the
area.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 19
SECRET
September 30, 1963
TO: Members of Subcommittee on Castro-Communist
Subversion.
FROM: Chairman, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion
SUBJECT: Report for July - August on Actions Taken to
Combat Castro-Communist Subversion.
Attached is a draft of the Subcommittee's report for
July and August on actions taken to counteract Castro-
communist subversion in the hemisphere. The draft has been
prepared on the basis of the material which you furnished
with certain modifications. The CIA man will note that I
have extracted from his submission the items of action taken
and placed these in the body of the report. The intelligence
information contained in the submission I have made into a
I think it is very
useful to have the intelligence
data form part of the report, and request that in the future
the CIA member prepare his submission in two parts.
May I have your comments on the draft by close of
business October 1, 1963.
Copies to: CIA
DOD
USA
FAR
Justice
Mr. Webster (2)
Col. Haig (2)
Mr. Wagley (1)
Mr. Hart (1)
Mr. Geoghegan (1)
62-108553-5
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 20
ENCLOSURE
GROUP I
-Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
SECRET
CIA Intelligence Annex
ANNEX A
1. Travel to and from Cuba
Brazil
Chartered Cubana Airlines flights between Cuba and
Brazil have become a major means of transporting non-Cuban
Latin Americans to and from Cuba. The five such flights since
late July have carried nearly 400 non-Cubans.
The first of the recent series on 25 July -- brought
71 Latin American passengers to Havana for the 25 July celebra-
tions. The other four flights on 15, 22, 23 and 29 August --
transported over 200 Latin Americans to Brazil from Havana.
Some of the aircraft involved returned to Cuba with smaller
numbers of passengers. Many of the 200 Latin American passengers
had been delegates to the 26 July ceremonies, but others had
apparently been in Cuba for longer periods and some had probably
received training there. Of the passengers on these four flights
to Brazil, 75 were natives of Caribbean area countries. Their
circuitous travel through Brazil was evidently designed to help
conceal the fact that they had been in Cuba.
Costa Rica
Two Costa Ricans were among the passengers on a
chartered Cubana plane which was turned back to Havana at Grand
Cayman on 11 July 1963. One was Miss Herina Hernandez Salazar,
the only Costa Rican woman known to have been sent to Cuba for
training as a guerrilla warfare instructor. She had been in
Cuba since September 1962. The other Costa Rican passenger was
Carlos Cuillon, former head of the Costa Rican Society of
Friends of the Cuban Revolution, who had been in Cuba since
November 1962.
Ecuador
The CIA station in Quito reports that the military
junta, which assumed power in Ecuador on 11 July, can be expected
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 21
SECRET
62-108553-5
ENCLOSURE
SECRET
to follow the guidance of the Embassy and the Station in
controlling travel to and from Cuba and the Soviet bloc. The
activities of Cuban subversives in Ecuador, at least for the
present, have been greatly inhibited by the mass arrests of
Communists and pro-Cubans and by the outlawing of the Communist
Party by the junta.
Honduras
It is reported that the Honduran Communist Party has
issued orders to its members not to attempt to travel to Cuba
at the present time. This action is apparently the result of
the increasing vigilance of the Honduran government and the
greater implementation of stricter travel controls.
2. Movement of Cuban Propaganda
Guatemala
According to an unconfirmed report received in July,
a Bureau of Information of the Communist Party of Guatemala is
being formed in collaboration with Prensa Latina and is to be
managed clandestinely. It expects to receive news by shortwave
radio from Cuba and print bulletins for distribution by radio
stations. This may indicate a pattern by which Prensa Latina
will attempt to distribute on a more clandestine basis in other
areas in Latin America.
Honduras
It was reliably reported that in mid-July 1963, a
small coastal freighter landed 14 large boxes of Communist
propaganda on the northern coast of Honduras, the boxes having
been transferred at sea from a larger vessel.
3. Movement of Guerrillas and Arms
Argentina
Extremist members of the Peronist Party, apparently
under the leadership of such figures as Hector Villalon and
John William Cooke, are apparently receiving encouragement and
promises of large sums of money from Cuba in support of their
efforts to train and organize subversive groups in Argentina.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 22
SECRET
Villalon has stated that his plan calls for expanding and
escalating subversive activities in Argentina culminating
in a complete takeover within two years. There is no indica-
tion that Peron himself is amenable to this plan. It has been
reported that leaders of the Communist Party of Argentina have
been greatly annoyed by the tendency of the Castro regime to
support the revolutionary Peronists without having consulted
the Communist Party of Argentina.
It is reported that the so-called Army of National
Liberation (ANL) of Argentina, which is a relatively small
Castroist organization directed from Cuba by John William Cooke,
has in recent weeks been negotiating for the purchase of arms
and has been offered submachine guns, carbines and other weapons
by two or three private suppliers. It was reported, however,
that the ANL was having difficulty getting enough dollars from
Cuba to make significant purchases possible.
Bolivia
The Bolivian Ministry of Foreign Relations on 23
August protested formally to the Cuban Charge d' Affaires in La
Paz against the Cuban government support to the miners during
the recent crisis. Subsequently, however, Foreign Minister
Fellon informed the Cuban Embassy that he need not fear that
the Government of Bolivia would break diplomatic relations with
Cuba. There has, in fact, been no hard information linking the
Cuban Embassy with the recent mining crisis in spite of some
unconfirmed reports of Cuban support.
Brazil
A Cuban Ambassador to Brazil, Raul Roa Kouri, is reported
to have attempted to encourage former Stagne leader Francisco
Juliao to revitalize the movement in northeastern Brazil. According
to some reports, efforts are being made to unify the leadership
and bring dissident elements under the general direction of
Juliao. Other reports indicate that, although the Cuban Embassy
is providing guidance and financial support to the
movement, it is not yet clear what the specific disposition in
the league.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 23
SECRET
Colombia
From Colombia reports have been received of increasing
Cuban assistance, primarily in the form of training courses by
instructors who have been trained in Cuba, to the Worker-Student-
Peasant Movement (MTC). A small guerrilla band encountered
by the Colombian army in July 1963 was broken up when five
members of the band were killed and two others captured. A
small quantity of arms and a considerable amount of books and
pamphlets on revolutionary warfare, photographs of Fidel Castro,
Camilo Cienfuegos and Mao Tse-tung, and bulletins of the MCR
were found at the campsite. Recent reports have indicated a
decrease in the terrorist efforts of the MCR and increased
promises of assistance from Che Guevara with regard to the
training of additional MCR members.
Costa Rica
In mid-July an increased number of guerrillas were
reportedly being trained in Costa Rica by Adolfo Garcia Zorrilla,
well-known Nicaraguan revolutionary leader and member of the
FLN (National Liberation Front, a Communist-dominated, Cuban-
supported, anti-Nicaraguan revolutionary group). In early
August, Alberto Sorroco, leader of the FLN in Costa Rica, left
with a group of Nicaraguans for the Costa Rican-Nicaraguan
border. The purchase of arms and supplies and the recruitment
of Nicaraguans for a new anti-Nicaraguan force are also reportedly
underway in Costa Rica.
Hector Rodriguez, Costa Rican agitator, left San Jose
in mid-August for the Nicaraguan border to supervise the passage
of Nicaraguan guerrillas across Costa Rica into Nicaragua.
Rodriguez, who recently resumed his standing the May Day
celebrations in Cuba, was assigning this responsibility by the
Costa Rican Communist Party.
Honduras
The Honduran armed forces began to move against a group
of pro-Castro guerrillas operating near the Nicaraguan border
and active in the whole area of the Nicaraguan-Honduran border.
The Nicaraguan National Guard has been conducting operations
on its side of the border against the insurgents since July.
The dense jungle and difficult terrain, however, will impede the
efforts of both forces to eliminate the guerrillas.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 24
SECRET
Information on the guerrilla force is scanty and
conflicting. It is apparently a mixture of members of the National
Liberation Front (FLN), a Communist-dominated and Cuba-supported
revolutionary organization active primarily in Honduras and
Nicaragua since the fall of 1962. The strength of the force
is not known.
Panama
A captured guerrilla of the FLN (National Liberation
Front, a Communist-dominated, Cuban-supported, anti-Nicaraguan
group) confessed that he was a member of a group of 46 who
entered Nicaragua from Honduras on 22 July. He said that their
mission was to establish a base camp in the Icatlan mountains,
Department of Jucales, in order to indoctrinate the peasants
and to train them in guerrilla tactics. He admitted that he
had received six months' guerrilla warfare training in Cuba and
that other FLN leaders had received similar training. He also
said that the FLN training camp in Honduras was near El Lagarto,
on the Patuca River.
4. Transfer of Funds
British Guiana
In British Guiana, Guiana Export-Import Corporation
(Gimpex) received a one million dollar advance payment deposited
by the Cuban Alimpex Corporation for goods to be delivered to
Cuba in the future. Gimpex has, in turn, loaned this money to
the Government of British Guiana. Cheddi Jagan's People's
Progressive Party is the major stockholder in Gimpex. Mohammed
Easin, manager of Gimpex, has indicated that Gimpex will be
able to secure additional loans from Cuba in amounts sufficient
to tide the Jagan government over any foreseeable crisis. It
was also reported that Gimpex plans to buy aircraft, spare parts
and other machinery in the United States for reshipment to Cuba.
Canal
Reports continue to be received from many places indicating
that the suitcase full of currency is still one of the most common
methods used by the Cubans for transmitting funds for
use in supporting subversive activities throughout the hemisphere.
Instances where such funds have been confiscated by the police
have occurred recently in El Salvador, Panama and Ecuador.
NW 50953 DocId:32112623 Page 25
SECRET