124-10168-10040
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: FBI
RECORD NUMBER: 124-10168-10040
RECORD SERIES: HQ
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 62-116391-41X
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR: FBI
FROM: PAPICH, SAM
TO: DIRECTOR, FBI
TITLE:
DATE: 03/13/1970
PAGES: 85
SUBJECT: CIA ACT, ANTI-CASTRO ACT
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
ORIGINAL CLASSIFICATION: Secret
NEW CLASSIFICATION:
REVIEW DATE: 11/03/1998
UPDATE DATE: 02/12/2001
STATUS Redact
RESTRICTIONS: JFK Act 6 (1)(A)
JFK Act 6 (1)(B)
JFK Act 6 (1)(C)
COMMENTS: EBF, INC ADMIN PAGES
NW 50953 DocId:32169180 Page 1
)
ITED STATES GOVERNMENT
Memorandum
The Director
FROM SA Sam Papich
i
SUBJECT RELATIONS WITH CIA
Prior Release was made to
Rickefeller Commission
DATE: 3/13/79
YSPA-
3/16/8/
CLASS. & EXT. SP 14379
REASON-FCIM II, 12.4.2 23,
DATE OF REVIEW 3/13/90
707#22,330
ALL INFORMATION CONTAINED
HEREIN IS UNCLASSIFIED
EXCEPT WHERE SHOWN
OTHERWISE
CIA INFO ON pg 214 22
only was Declassed per
John E. Bacon 8/27/80
Reference is made to my letters dated March 2 and
March 5, 1970. In my letter of March 5, 1970, I stated "it
is important to emphasize that the Bureau can also produce
an extensive list of justified grievances." It is my under-
standing that the Director desired that this list be identifiod.
Enclosed herewith is a list of approximately 75 items. u
This list should not be considered absolutely complete.
Preparation was prodicated on my personal recollection and a
review of Bureau records. To make this list more complete and
specifically occurate would necessitate the review of thousands
of files. The enclosed list can be supported by Bureau records.
Hint CIA Fordelicet om ine same item is unknown.
also must be kept in mind in connection with our evaluation
of the alleged CIA grievances which I previously listed.
inis
I realize that it is presumptuous on my part, but
if the Director feels that our Dureau work can benefit by a
personal discussion between the Director and myself, I am
availabloc until april 3, 1970. I plan to leave the area.
jimmediately thereafter for an extended period.
ACTION:
For information.
Enclosure
1
Mr. DeLoach
REC-ET
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO ST 102
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
1 Mr. Sullivan N THIS DOCUMENT
1
-
-
Mr. Papich
SJP:
(4)
HP/8/98
62-80750-478
に
10 APR-1 1810
11
2013
Clarified by 122
Classified by
Exempt from Category 23
Declaceity on:
Date of Declassification
definite
DADR (JFK)
11-11-15
ONCLOSUIC
2/9/98
5668 SLO/GEL
NW 50953 DocId:32169180 Page 2
CENTRA
INT
LIGENCE AGENCE
SEGRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20505
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR
:
AS BRACKETED PE.3
20 March 1970
KP 1/8/98
The Honorable. J. Edgar Hoover
Director
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D. C.
Dear Mr. Hoover:
FBI INFO
CLASORTY 5668 SLO/GCL
426)
(JFK) 2/9/98 4/2/98
We have completed our review of domestic positive intelligence
collection engendered by your letter of 11 March 1970. We warmly
welcome periodic reexamination by our two agencies of the implemen..
tation of the 1960 agreement and the colicon of positive intelligence
which you proposed. I concur also with your comments that there is
a need for close coordination of our efforts in the field of positive and
counterintelligence collection, To be most effective, I agree that it
is essential for this Agency, together with your Bureau, to conduct a
continuing analysis of clandestine collection activity. The product is
of growing importance to the national security and to the United States
Intelligence Community, Therefore we endorse your proposal for a
reexamination and bespeak your desires ás to how this might be
conducted.
ว
With regard to the 1966 set of ground rules, which you sent to
the then Director, Vice Admiral William F. Raborn, Jr., the compe-
tent work of our respective representatives did, in fact, produce an
effective and realistic agreement. I welcorne your statement that no
major problems have been encountered since its adoption.
I feel strongly that there are other related subjects, of similar
importance to the national security, which warrant periodic reexamina-
tion since they have a direct bearing on domestic clandestine collection
of positive intelligence.
REC 8
EXP. PROC.
MAR 20 1970.
1
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 3
SECRET
1
MAY 6 1970
GROUP 1
Exclace from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
As a result of our review, engendered by your letter, I believe
that the following subjects are deserving of your personal consideration:
(1) Audio coverage. Audio coverage provides timely
intelligence of inestimable worth to U.S. officials for
policy planning, early warning, and accurate guidance
necessary for the improvement of operational and collec-
tion activity here and abroad. Audio coverage is unique
production because it is readily subject to local cross-
checking and evaluation which is far more difficult and
costly to achieve abroad. Further, such coverage is on
targets which affect directly the national interests.
For several years your Bureau had been recep-
tive to requirements and leads which resulted in valuable
coverage.
The quality of your production proved that
your Burcau alone possesses capabilitics and experience
which cannot be duplicated by any other U.S. agency.
On 2 October 1969 two related requests for audio
coverage were submitted by this Agency pertaining to
positive intelligence targets, one of whom had KGB connec-
tions. (I refer to the case of
and
) Your Bureau replied that henceforth the
Agency should refer all such cases directly to the Attorney
General for approval.
It is suggested that the question of audio coverage
be reopened between representatives of your Bureau and
this Agency. I would welcome your thoughts and observa-
tions on this subject.
I wish to assure you that I believe that this sensitive
type of collection should be implemented under rigid and
stringent controls. This is absolutely necessary in order to
maintain the highest standard of security both in instituting
the coverage and for the exploitation of the product. (An
excellent example of this is demonstrated in your effective
and secure production of SCOPE.) (3)
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 4
2
SECRET
(2) Mail Coverage. Another much needed intelli-
gence tool is mail coverage.. Its importance has been
proven in the past. I have the impression that it has
been discontinued, and I would suggest that our represen-
tatives should confer and examine together whether this
asset might be deployed against communications of the
Soviet Block the New Left, and identified foreign agents.
(3) CIA Technical Services.
A significant expendi-
ture of this Agency's money and personnel has been com-
mitted to research and development for the improvement
of technical aids.
This Agency has provided your Bureau
with an appreciation of our resources and capabilities, and
has offered you at cost or gratis our most sophisticated
equipment.
Although we will continue these services, we would welcome
any suggestions from your Bureau for improvement in the
technical field including proposals how these assets can be
better employed. Your comments will be particularly
appreciated in view of our mutual interests in implementing
Operation
১
(4) Courses in Positive Intelligence Requirements and
Reporting. Since the collection and reporting of positive
foreign intelligence is, as you say, only incidental to your
main internal security and counterintelligence responsibili-
ties, I realize that your personnel are somewhat at a dis-
advantage in carrying out the evaluating and reporting
processes necessary for the conduct of positive intelligence.
At our 1966 conference, we offered to institute positive intel-
ligence nce training courses, including reports writing and
* this section desenides sources
technical intelligence 3 Collection.
for
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 5
SECRET
(s
analysis, for FBI personnel.
In soliciting your views on
the desirability of this type of training, I wish to reiterate
our willingness to provide such instruction. It would be
designed to expose the needs of the Intelligence Community
in depth, thus making the Current Intelligence Reporting
List (CIRL) more meaningful to your personnel.
(5) Seminars on Opposition Services. Given the
growing sophistication and increased capabilities of hostile
intelligence services, it is suggested that CIA and FBI
experts in this field meet as required at our respective
Headquarters, the Washington and New York Field Offices,
in order to keep abreast of new developments, modus
operandi, operational tasks, and diverse missions of
opposition services. I know that you will agree with me
that no opportunities for improvement should be over-
looked which might help to negate the efforts of hostile
services who are charged with undermining the security
of the United States. These sessions should also provide
an opportunity to explore and devise new means to pene-
trate and neutralize these inimical forces.
(6) Live Bloc Sources. The record of our coopera-
tion and coordination to exploit live penetrations and defec-
tors from Bloc sources proves the success of our mutual
effort.
I believe that there is room for substantial improve-
ment in achieving a more uniform and efficient exploitation
of the positive intelligence potential of certain of these
sensitive sources. I would invite your thoughts on how we
may better coordinate requirements for these sources and
establish a more thorough evaluation of their positive
intelligence production before it is given general dissemina-
tion within the Government. Our review would suggest that
there are good reasons for consultation to explore the
development of higher quality live sources, for example
(code clerks. (5)
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 6
4
SECRET
(7) Live Sources in the Non-Bloc Area.. Sources
such as code clerksend diplomats are a fertile field for
procurement of much-needed intelligence relating to the
activities of certain Latin American and Middle Eastern
countries which are expanding their subversive and
terrorist activities, even to the United States. I do not.
feel confident that both agencies have adequately exploited
the full potential of this field, and would urge that this
subject be explored by our respective representatives.
(8) New Left and Racial Matters. There is already
a substantial exchange of information in this field. Limi-
tations of manpower raise a serious question as to whether
both agencies can keep pace with future unpredictable
developments. The increasingly close connection between
these forces in the United States and hostile elements
abroad has been well established by both of our agencies.
I feel it would be in our mutual interest to determine how
we can best employ more wisely our limited manpower,
knowing that this problem, which embraces bombings,
hijacking, assassination, and the demeaning of law enforce-
ment officers, is international in scope.
(9) Relations with Domestic Field Offices and Legal
Attaches. I do not feel that there are any serious conflicts
in this area but there may be room for improving the quality
of liaison in order to expand positive intelligence collection.
Given the changing situations both here and abroad, periodic
re-examination of field relations could assist both agencies
to make mutually-agreed adjustments.
Mr. Hoover, I wish to assure you that I value highly your personal
judgment in affairs bearing on the national security. I know that your
experience is derived from a unique lifetime of dedicated service to our
country. In this spirit, I welcome sincerely your observations on the
foregoing agenda and solicit your thoughts regarding any other item
which you deem worthy of the attention of your Bureau and this Agency.
Faithfully yours,
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 7
5
سند
SECRET
Richard Helms
Director
SECRET
CASES AND/C SITUATIONS
INVOLVING COM LICTS WITH THE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (CIA)
(1) KOCASE (THE BORIS MORROS CASE)
IN Tro USUMENT, KP 1/8/98
This was a sensitive Sovict-espionage case
which originated in 1943 and terminated for the most
part in 1957. The case had many wide foreign ramifi-
cations and historically has been, and undoubtedly
will be, one of the most important and involved cases
of Soviet operations in this country and abroad. We
did not disseminate any information of significance
in this case until 1954. On various occasions when
the Liaison Agent has become involved in heated argu-
ments with CIA officials, they have seen fit to raise
this case as an outstanding example of FBI failure to
cooperate with the Agency. The position taken by CIA
was that it should have been advised regarding the
Soviet operational activity in foreign countries,
claiming that the Agency would have had the opportunity
to develop more information of significance, identify
Soviet ag its, and possibly prepare conditions for
recruitment or doubling of Soviet operatives. We did
not disseminate our reports to CIA because of the
extreme sensitivity of the case. We actually did not
permit CIA to handle any investigations relating to
Ithe MOCASE until 1957.
In 1957, CIA complained that it certainly had
every right to have received the information earlier
because many aspects of the MCCASE pertained to CIA
employees and operations. CIA further argued that it
had been greatly handicapped in effectively carrying out
the leads in 1957 because the leads were given to the
Agency at the same time that the case was publicized.
The Agency argued that the failure of the Bureau to
coordinate with CIA those French aspects of the case
permitted the French, rather than the U. S., to play a
Idominating role in Europe.
POTR MANGOLD RELEASE (CAT. 88-1826)
5668 SLO/GCL
(1)(6)
(JFK) 2/9/984/2/98
SECRET
4801-
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 8
1
How much information CIA has developed over
the years concerning our operational activity in
Mexico City is unknown. However, we should bear-in
mind that former Special Agent George Munro handled
many of our operations in Mexico, including key infor-
mants, and sübsequently begän performing services for
CIA after he left the Bureau. We also should not
forget that Americans operating in Latin American
countries for one agency are heavily exposed to the
resources of another U., S., intelligence or investigative
agency. This Agent knows from personal experience that
operating in these areas constitutes a "very small world"
and the exposure to leaks and errors is considerable.
(3) THE ABEL CASE
Although CIA has not raised the point for
several years, the prevailing attitude was, and probably
still exists, that the FBI did not play it square with
CIA in the Abel age by not making certain that the
Agency was given the proper recognition for its contri-
butions. CIA feels that in the first place, there would
not have been any U. S. access or availability to the
source in this case, Reino Hayhanen, because CIA tock
the full responsibility for moving Hayhanen from France
to the U. S. in 1957. CIA claims it took the risk and
responsibility of doing this after the Bureau declined
to become involved in any operation designed to transport
Hayhanen to the U. S. It should be noted that Hayhanen
iwas an alcoholic and that his first contacts with CIA
in Paris raised questions concerning Hayhanen's mental
stability.
After Hayhanen arrived in the U. S., we
arranged access to him for a period, the purpose of
which was to obtain a complete story of his intelli-
gence activities in the U. S. and we were particularly
interested in identifying all of his associates, es-
pecially the man who later was identified as Rudolph
Abel. After a short handling period in the U. S., we
dropped Hayhanen because he became a problem. It was
an extremely critical situation because we had not yet
identified Abel. CIA agreed to take the responsibility
for the carrying and safeguarding of Hayhanen but we
SECRET
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 9
-
4
-
countries with far better impressions than in the
past. In addition, we have learned more about these
countries, their services, and their security chiefs
by spending a few minutes with them. Needless to say,
this kind of treatment has alsó, immeasurably helped
our Legal Attaches.
(5)
(5)
(7) CIA-DUTCH -DUTCH INTEREST IN SOVIET ESPIONAGE ACTIVITY
In 1965, the Dutch Internal Security Service(s)
was in the process of investigating individuals in
Holland Who allegedly, had been engaged in Soviet-espionage
activity. The Dutch wanted to have certain individuals
in the U. S. interviewed and approached CIA to make
inquiry at the at the Bureau
At that time, our relations
with the Dutch had Butch had been practically nonexistent because
the Dutchshad failed to honestly deal with us in the
case of Joseph Petersen, a Dutch official who had been
clandestinely collecting intelligence at the National
Security Agency. When CIApproached us, we told
the Agency Sthat the Dutchkcould submit their request
through diplomatic channels. We subsequently told CIA)
we would not handle the interviews for the Dutch Is We
stuck to our position. (CCIA surrendered but felt that
we were impairing their efforts to gather information
concerning Soviet-espionage activities in Europe.
(Walter G. Krivitsky, Bufile
-
100-11146)
(8) COLONEL JOHN GROMBACH (PAT O'BRIEN)
:
Colonel John Grombach was a retired U. S.
Army officer who, during World War II, established a
private intelligence network, operating throughout the
world but primarily in Europe. His sources included
any number of European exiles who came to the U. S.
While he was in business, he was financed by the State
Department, then the Department of the Army, and in the
later 1940's and into the 1950's by CIA. Grombach
established contact with the Bureau through one of
his subordinates, Pat O'Brien, who periodically called
SECRET
-7-
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 10
1
on us and furnished information which Grombach felt
was of interest
uw. This dissemination through
Pat O'Brien continued during the period of Grombach's
relationship with CIA. We never informed CIA that we
were receiving such information which also was of
interest to the Agency. It is possible that Grombach
had given the same data to CIA but we do not know. CIA
and Grombach clashed and the relationship was severed
in an atmosphere of severe bitterness. In the last
years of its dealings with Grombach, the Agency Shad
successfully penetrated the latter's organization and
allegedly had identified many of the sources. CIA
hinted to the Liaison Agent that it had become aware
of the relationship between Grombach's organization
and the Bureau. How much CIA really learned about
this relationship is not known but if its penetrations
were significant, the Agency may have developed evidence
to justify a charge that the Eureau had withheld infor-
mation from CIA, particularly when we were receiving
the data from an organization which was financed by
the Agoncy (Bufile 62-77906)
(5)
(9) COMMISSION ON THE ORGANIZATION OF THE
EXECUTIVE ERANCII OF THE GOVERNMENT
(Herbert Hoover Commission
1954)
In October, 1954, a task force of the captioned
Commission initiated a survey of CIA's operations under
the leadership of General Mark W. Clark. In January, 1955,
we were advised by a representative of the task force
that Senator Joseph McCarthy had furnished the group a
list of CIA employees who were considered subversive.
CIA became cognizant of this development and there was
talk within the Agency that the Bureau had furnished
the names to the Senator. When the Liaison Agent was
informally approached on this, he flatly told the Agency
to officially submit its charges.
The Agency never did.
What information CIA may have had on this matter as it
pertained to the Bureau is not known. It is possible that
the Agency's attitude was strictly predicated on a knowledge
that we maintained liaison with the Senator's Committee.
(Relations with CIA, Bufile 62-80750)
-
SECRET
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 11
-
8
-
During the 1950's, we gave our Legal Attaches
numerous leads stemming from internal security cases in
the U.S. In many instances we did not see fit to
notify CIA although the Agency always maintained that
you could not separate "internal Security" from "counter-
intelligence," namely a lead in France pertaining to a
communist in the US warranted advising CHAY if not
at least asking the Agency to handle the lend. In the
last several years, it is not believed that there is
any basis for complaint since we have regularly been
notifying CIA concerning subjects of cases who travel
abroad. If the Legal Attache is investigating, CIA is
notified in order to avoid duplicate efforts.
There
have been exceptions where we have taken the position
that CIA should not be notified because of the sensitivity
of the matter. How many such exceptions are known to
CIA cannot be established from our files; however, we
should bear in mind that wiem our Legal Attaches inve3-
tigate, they contact many of the same foreign officials
normally contacted by CIA. How many of these foreign
officials are CIA informants, or on the Agency payroll,
is unknown.
(11) BUREAU OPERATIONS IN CUBA
We operated informants in Cuba when we had a
Legal Attache's Office in Havana. Informants reported
on activities of communists and other subversives in
that country. During the period we operated these
informants, we did not coordinate our operations with
CIA. We did not advise the Agency that we had such
sources. However, in 1960, after Castro came on the
scene, it became infeasible to handle certain informants
in a secure manner. Approval was granted to turn certain
informants over to CIA. What these informants may have
subsequently told CIA about past Bureau operations is
unknown. This item is being cited in the event CIA had
evidence to establish that we had been operational in
Cuba and had not coordinated with the Agency pursuant
to Directives. (Memorandum Donahoe to Belmont, February 5,
1960, re: "Partido Socialista Popular," 64-200-210, 2377
and Memorandum Frohbose to Belmont, February 3, 1960, re:
"Narcisco Tauler Beneficto, 7134-8539-4) (5)
SECRET
-9
-
:
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 12
:
In 1959 the U. S. Ambassador in Brazil accused
our Legal Attache of engagin "in uncoordinated covert
intelligence activity "of a nature which I believe
exceeds his terms of reference." The Ambassador further
indicated that CIA was unhappy over the Legal Attache's
activities and the Agency allegedly had told the Ambassador
that the Legal Attache had disseminated information from
a source who was a fabricator or a provocator, This
situation arose as a result of the Legal Attaches
operation of an informant in Brazil Some of the
information that he received from the informant was
of a derogatory nature and related to a Brazilian ho
was being touted as a Presidential candidate. CIA
asked for the identity of the informant and we told
the Agency that the person could not be identified
because he did not wish that his identity be disclosed.
This case is being cited because CIA may have evidence
that we had been operational in Brazil Shad not coordi-
nated pursuant to Directives, and that the matter was
further aggravated because of the alleged unreliability
of the information. (Memorandum Roach to Belmont,
May 1, 1959, re: "William I. Friedman, Legal Attache,
Rio de Janeiro," 67-429840) and (Memorandum Roach to
Belmont, May 25, 1959 re: "Soviet-Satellite Activities
Brazil."
1) 134-7667-48)(5)
(13) BORDER COVERAGE
-
In June, 1957, our Phoenix Office presented a
problem concerning the Bureau's handling of informants
on the Mexican border. These informants were operating
inside Mexico. The problem was predicated on situations
which might arise as the result of CIA's endeavors to
develop informants who already were being handled by the
Bureau, It was pointed out that CIA logically could
come in contact with such sources and could make approaches
for recruitment. It was recommended and approved that
in order to protect our coverage in the border area, a
valuable, trusted, and reliable confidential source would
continue to be utilized even if he were contaced by CIA.
Our policy was that we would not identify our sources to
the Agency.
SECRET
-
10
--
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180
Page 13
How much CIA learned about our border coverage
is not known. Again, it is pointed out that former
Bureau Agent George Munro Say ge Munro ay have been knowledgeable.
As indicated, he later began performing services for
CIA. If CIA learned that we were operating informants
in Mexico, it could use such information as additional
evidence of Bureau failure to cooperate and coordinate
with the Agency pursuant to Directives. (Memorandum
Roach to Belmont, June 14, 1957, re"Communist Coverage
Along the Mexican Border, Relations with CIA,
100-356015-1238)
(14) CARPORT CASE
In May, 1957, the Bureau's double Agent in the
captioned case was advised by his Soviet contact that he
was to have a meeting in Switzerland during the period
June 16-1951957. A question arose as to whether CIA
Should be informed concerning the double Agentura Agent stravel
to Switzerland(s) It was recommended and approved that we
not advise CIA.
The
:
What is important here is that CIA established
contact with our double agentet agentet one point. The Agency
may have had further contact without our knowledge.
Agency may have also picked up the contact with the Soviets
in Switzerland. JsThe case is being highlighted since we
cannot exclude the possibility that the Agency has evidence
to demonstra that we were operational in Europe and we
did not coordinate with the Agency. (Memorandum Branigan
to Belmont, June 10, 1957, re; "CARPORT," 105-25453-1825)(5)
(15) CIA REQUESTS FOR LUREAU LECTURE ON COMMUNISM IN THE U. S.
On September 25, 1958, CIA inquired if W. C.
Sullivan could give a lecture on the communist movement
in the U. S. It was recommended that Sullivan give the
lecture. Such lectures were being afforded in other parts
of the Government. The Director made the notation "We
cannot make Sullivan available to this outfit." The
Agency accepted this as an affront and a blatant refusal
SECRET
-
11
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 14
to cooperate on a most important subject of interest
to both agencies. (Memorandum Sullivan to Belmont,
October 1, 1958, re: "Request for Lecture on Communism.
by.CIA,").
:
(16) CASE OF
On July 9, 1956, an official of the State..
Department confidentially advised the Bureau that
a CIA employee in Moscow, had been
involved in an affair with a Soviet girl. According
to our source,
allegedly had furnished information
to the Eviet girl. We checked with the State Department
and CIA and we confirmed that
☑ had been involved in
an affair and that he had been recalled. According to
CIA and State Department, there was no indication that
had been involved in any espionage against the
U. S. CIA gave consideration to requesting the Bureau
to identify its source and then changed its mind.
Whether CIA has documented this as an instance where
the Bureau failed to cooperate by not volunteering the
source is a matter of conjecture but, it is a case that
should be kept in mind. (Bufile
(17) THE
OPERATION
In April, 1963, we became involved with CIA in
that Agency's efforts to collect sensitive information
relating to French Government intentions to conduct
espionage against the U. S. CIA had access to a sensitive
source,
who was in a position to make
,
available highly important French documents. On April 11,
1963, CIA informed us that our Legal Attache in Parishad
locally contacted CIA concerning this matter. CIA Head-
quarters was highly disturbed because its office in Paris(s)
had not been cut in on this operation and the Agency wanted
to be informed regarding the nature and the extent of our
dissemination of CIA information to our Legal Attache. We
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 15
-
12
SECRET
determined that the Legal Attache had made inquiries in
Parin response to leads which had been sent from Bureau
Headquarters. This matter is being highlighted hecause
it was a vitally important operation to CIA and the Agency
had received indications that information had been leaked
to French French authorities. We have no evidence or reason to
believe that the Legal Attache Office ever involved itself
in any such leak. However, we should not, under any cir-
cumstances, discount the fact that CIA Mas penetrated
Freuch services and has had access to Sensitive information
Xin Paris) The French have always had an outstanding cap-
ability of tapping phones and installing microphones in
Paris. Such coverage on U. S. officials, including their
residences, should never be excluded. The information we
had conveyed to our Legal Attache possibly may have been
acquired by the French through clandestine coverage.
possibly could charge us with handling their sensitive
information in an insecure manner by transmitting it to
Paris without conferring with the Agency.
م
(5)
CIA
In connection with alleged French espionage
activity in the U. S., CIA has never been satisfied with
the efforts made by the Bureau. The Agency possibly could
take the position that we looked lightly at the allegations
and did not pursue a mater which, in their eyes, merited
a more aggressive approach. (Bufile
For some time, CIA has held to a position that
the French Intelligence Service (SDECE) is penetrated_by
the Soviets. The Agency has pointed out that if the French])
are Collecting sensitive information in the U. S., the
product is ending up in Moscow.JS / In January, 1964
reviewed the status of our investigation of French intel-
ligence activities in the U. S. The Director commented
"I think this whole thing has been imaginary on the part
of CIA which has been played as a sucker by
We
I would waste no more time on it at least until al1 CIA
restrictions are removed." CIA did impose restrictions
by not permitting us to pursue certain leads because it
feared that its sensitive source would be jeopardized.
(Bufile
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 16
-
13 -
SECRET
from CIA. We did not obtain clearance from CIA for
the inclusion of this information in our monograph.
Clearance approval was not obtained because of the
urgency of the document. CIA was irritated because
it considered our action a distinct violation of the the
third agency rule. The Agency "never made any protest.
(21) BUREAU INFORMANTS IN GUATEMALAIS)
In 1966, and 1967, we were operating informants...
in Guatemala(s) At the inception of our operational ac-
tivity, CIA was not informed. In one case, we finally
were able to effect the necessary arrangements with CIA
whereby the Bureau would be permitted to run the informant
in Guatemala.J) In the second instance, we established an
agreement with CIA in October, 1967, that we could con-
tinue handling an informant in Guatemala with the under-
standing that the Bureau Agent, on the occasion of each
visit, would confer with the local CIA office on political
information collected from the informant. These two cases
had all the makings of a conflict.
CIA was under the
definite impression that we had been running these
informants before we had finally coordinated with them.
It is true that the CIA Chierin Guatemala Vas much
incensed but no issue was made at CIA Headquarters and
thematter was put to rest.
CIA may have developed concrete evidence that
we were operating in Guatemala bearing in mind that in
a placo such as Guatemala CitySit would not be difficult
for a CIA intelligence officer to spot an FBI Agent in
contact with Guatemalans Our potential vulnerability is
that we were operating in Guatemala without coordinating
with CIA.
(22)
The information emanating from the caption
sensitive Bureau operation has been disseminated to CIA
and other agencies for several years. The sensitive
source has traveled abroad numerous times and his trips
NW 50953 DocId: 32169180 Page 17
-
15
-
SECRET
(25) ESTABLISHMENT OF BUREAU LIAISON WITH
DUTCH INTERNAL SECURITY SERVICE
1950
In January, 1960, our Legal Attache, Bonn,
traveled to Holland for the purpose of exploring arrange-
ments for liaison with appropriate Dutch Authorities. The
U. S. Ambassador raised questions, Yoointing out that over
the years, all relations with the Dutch authorities had
been handled through CIA He indicated that before there
was any change in procedure, it would be necessary for
CIA and FBI to come to some form of an agreement. Allen
Dulles subsequently expressed disappointment in that his
Agency had not been contacted by the Bureau prior to
exploring the liaison arrangement. We eventually conferred
with CIA and came to an agreement satisfactory to all
parties concerned.
Again, CIA could cite this as an instance where
we failed to coordinate with the Agency in line with
National Security Council Directives. (Memorandum Frohbose
to Belmont, March 3, 1960, re: "Legal Attache Operations
Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and the Netherlands," 66-1