124-10185-10099
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR: Executive Director/Comptroller
VIA
: Acting Deputy Director for Plans
SUBJECT
: Agency Support to the U.S. Secret Service
(USSS) for National Democratic (10-14 July
1972) and National Republican (21-24 August
1972) Conventions
1. This memorandum is for the information of the Executive
Director/Comptroller.
2. Authorization for CIA support to the U.S. Secret Service
for the Democratic and Republican National Conventions is con-
tained in a memorandum of 7 April 1972 from Chief, CI Staff to
the CCI which was concurred in by the ADDP and approved by the
DCI on 10 April 1972 (copy attached).
3. On 13 April 1972 the (cos, William
met with the Miami
USSS representative and ir. Nastro Mastrovito of
discuss preliminary planning for Station
USSS prior to and during subject Conventions. in 17 Anril 1972
tho C/M/COC and C/CI/LS: Ret with 'r. Bastrovito at Headquarters
to Implement the preliminary planning agreed upon in Miami and
to determine the extent of Headquarters support required by the
USSS.
4. The basic agreement cutually concurred in by the USSS
and licadquarters representatives provided that:
a. Station W!!/Miami would conduct name traces on
all Cubans of interest to the USSS,
b. CIA Headquarters would conduct name traces on
all other foreign born persons of interest to the USSS.
c. CIA would keen the USSS informed of any events
in the Caribbean and Latin American areas that would
have any bearing on the USSS protective mission during
the convention periods. This would include briefings
on Cuba and Cuban policies toward the United States and
on activities of Cuban intelligence operations which
could affect the security of the conventions.
d. Coverage of Latin American exile groups in the
United States would be the responsibility of the FRI
since CIA had ceased the extensive coverage formerly
targeted against these groups since it was now considered
an internal security function.
S. On 27 April 1972 a meeting was held at a buffer office
of Station Miani
with the USSS Chief of Communica-
It
tions, Station personnel and a fleadquarters representative.
was-agreed that name traces would be handled by Siami security
field office courier from the LSSS to mifer office until the USSS
ostablished communications links from their command post in
convention center, at which time trace requests would be sent
from the command post to USSS headquarters and relayed to CLA
Headquarters. Cuban name traces are relayed to Station All/iami
by the Signal Center and non-Cuban traces are conjucted by /COS
Replies to USSS requests on non-Cuisans are coordinated with
(CI/SO.
6. Station Mi/Miami has arranged the rental of a safehouse
about five minutes from convention center which will provide a
secure and nearby meeting site for SSS and Agency persoanel,
This safehouse will be available just prior to and during both
conventions. Headquarters officer will TOY to Viami prior to
the conventions and remain until the conventions adjourn to
assist the Station in providing the support descrived in paragraph
four above.
7. [Station Miami is in daily contact with the SSS in
Miani, utilizing buffer office as a meeting site when necessary.
Location of Station WH/Ciani
as not been revealed to
the USSS. (Station is located some distance from buffer office.)
Additionally, the Miani Security Field office maintains
liaison with the local USSS Miani unit.
8. The Station understands that no personnel will be present
at the convention hall, that they will not provide any equipment
unique to the Agency, nor will it provide the use of any other
facilities other than the safehouse described in paragraph six.
SECRET
May 1973
SUBJECT: Request for Information on Sensitive Activities
You will recall that in Fiscal Years 1971 and 1972,
I believe, Agency funds were made available to the FBI.
These funds may still be possibly held in a special
account for that use. This is one of the areas where
TSD has been very much involved. Chuck Briggs would
have the details as this was handled through the Executive
Director's office and of course Angleton would have
additional information.
Signed
IBN-1:
Chief
Missions and Programs Staff
EYES OILY
SECRET
E2 IMPDET CL BY 357737
8 May 1973
MEMORANDUM FOR : Deputy Director for Operations
SUBJECT
: Areas of Possible Embarrassment
to the Agency
1. Sometime in the spring or early summer of 1971, Mr. John
Dean levied the requirement on the Agency for information relating to
the Investors Overseas Service (IOS). The original request was
non-specific but it gradually emerged that Dean was concerned with
the possible adverse publicity that might develop regarding the
President's nephew, who was employed by IOS.
2. There were multiple channels from the White House to the
Agency on this subject:
a. Presumably Haldeman and/or Ehrlichman to Director
Helms.
b. Someone (unnamed) in the White House to the DDCI,
General Cushman (see attached telephone conversation).
Note that Ehrlichman is mentioned, and
c. John Dean to the CI Staff. These various channels
were sorted out in time and six reports were passed by
the CI Staff to Mr. Fred Fielding for Mr. John Dean.
3. The telephone call of General Cushman's is of interest since
it gives the flavor of White House concern. It took several days to
uncover the fact that the White House interest centered on the involve-
ment of the President's nephew with IOS and possible adverse publicity.
The reports submitted to Dean's office were routine in nature and were
coordinated with the DCI. After a few months, interest in this sub-
ject died down and we did not pursue it further.
4. Please return the attachments when they have served your
purpose.
SECRET
5. I also include a short note on the Intelligence Evaluation
Committee and Staff prepared by Richard Ober. The original
meetings were held in the office of John Dean at the White House
and the principal sparkplug for this group activity was the then
Assistant Attorney General for Internal Security, Robert Mardian
and then later his assistant, William Olsen. It is noted that Mr.
Mardian is now appearing before the Grand Jury and it is always
possible that he might draw in the Agency.
6. Before appointing (Ober) to the ICES Staff as the Agency
representative, I had attended various inter-agency meetings pre-
sided over by Mardian. I expressed the view to Director Helms
that Mardian would require very careful handling due to his inex-
perience. Furthermore, Mardian was deeply involved in the split
between Bill Sullivan and Mr. Hoover. On a confidential basis
one or two senior FBI officials stated that Sullivan was secretly
passing files to Mardian without Mr. Hoover's permission. This
was one of the important reasons why Sullivan was dismissed from
the Bureau.
Attachments (5)
James Angleton
Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations
SUBJECT
: Counter Intelligence Staff,
Police Group Activities
1. Counter Intelligence Staff, (Police Group (CPG)
is responsible for Staff coordination within the Office
of the Deputy Director for Operations for activities and
programs involving assistance to foreion molice/security
forces for the purpose of exploiting such activities and
programs for intelligence purposes.
2. CIPC maintains liaison with the office of Public
Safety, Arency for International Persion:ent (GPS/7)
and its training facility, the International Police Academy
(6)(IP). CICOalso administers and supervises Project
and its training proprietory facility, DEN-172.
In addition, CILPG coordinates a joint CPS/ATO Technical
Services Division, Contral Intelligence Agency (TS/CIA)
Technical Investigations Course.1 CIPG provides guidance
and counsel to the Area Divisions in matters pertaining
details of these functions are as follows:
LIAISON WITH OPS/AID
CIPG]liaison with OPS/AID and IPA is conducted on a
daily basis and consists principally of:
A. exchange of information on IPA participants, some
of whom later attend IDEN-172 courses and who are
of interest to Agency components,
B. arranging for inclusion of Agency sponsored partici-
pants in IPA/CPS/AMD training programs,
C. arranging for IPA/OPS/MIN briefings and tours for
foreign police/security representatives sponsored
by CIA Area Divisions,]
D. obtaining biographic and assessment data.on
IPA/OPS/AID trainces,.
E. providing general information pertaining to
police/security organizations, activities, equip-
ment, and personalities requested by Agency
operating components,
F. coordinating the Agency's participation in the
Technical Investigations Course designed to
familiarize the trainees with the technique
required to properly investigate terrorist
activities wherein explosives have been utilized,
Gobtaining OPS/AID Cover for CIA personnel to serve
abroad. At one time as many as 50 CIA employees
were covered in Latin America, the Far East and
Africa. This total has been reduced during the
past several years to 10 serving in Thailand,
II. arranging contact between Desk officers and OPS/AID
sponsored participants.
PROJECT IDEN-171
IDEN-172 Training Academy is a commercial interprise.
It was incorporated under the laws of the State of Maryland
in 1952 and conducts its business in the District of
Colombia. It is engaged principally in training foreign
police/security personnel under an overt contract with
OPS/AID, and selling police/security equipment to forcion
police/security personnel and organizations.IDEN-172 also
provides special training programs and briefings to
foreign police/security personnel of interest to Agency
operating divisions. It provides biographic and assessment
data on trainees to country desks. RecentlyIDEN-172 has
acquired the capability of providing training to foreign
police/security personnel in VIP protective security
for Chiefs of State.
CIA personnel under this cover will not be replaced as
such and all will be phased out by June 1974.
COMMENT
CIPG does not maintain direct contact or liaison
with any law enforcement organization, local or federal,
at home or abroad. When the need arises, such contact is
sometimes made on our behalf by OPS/AID or DEN-172 without
divulging Agency interest OPS/AIDS has such contacts
at home and abroad because of the nature of its activities
(training of forcion notice/security personnel at home
and abroad), and its Public Safety programs around the
world. IDEN-172 has such contacts at horre local and
federal level because its personnel are personally
acquainted with law enforcement officers throughout the
United States. Members of the (DEN-172 staff (not identified
as CIA) have appeared as guest lecturers at such federal
institutions as the U.S. Park Police, IPA, the U.S.
Secret Service, and the U.S. Treasury Enforcement Division.
3. In.addition to the liaison mentioned in the
previous paragraph, the Agency maintains liaison in varying
degrees with foreign police/security organizations through
its field stations. The existence and extent thereof,
however, is a decision to be made by the Area Civision,
and is not the responsibility of CI/PG.
4. The CIA station as a member of the Country Team in
Montevideo, Uruguay, may have had some contact with Dan
Mitrione, who was murdered by the Tupamaros. Dan Citrione,
an experienced and respected law enforcement officer, was
a bona fide OPS/AMD officer assigned to the AID mission
in Uruguay, and was never a CIA employee or agent.
James Engleton
Chief, Counter Intelligence Staff
SECRET
May 7.3
SUBJECT: The MHCHAOS Program
1. The MHCHAOS program is a worldwide program for
clandestine collection abroad of information on foreign
efforts to support/encourage/exploit/manipulate domestic
U.S. extremism, especially by Cuba, Communist China,
North Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Korea and the
Arab fedayeen.
2. The MHCHAOS program has not and is not conduct-
ing efforts domestically for internal domestic collection
purposes. Agency efforts are foreign. Foreign-oriented
activity in the United States has been of two types:
a. Selected FBI domestic sources who travel
abroad in connection with their extremist activity
and/or affiliations to make contact with hostile
foreign powers or with foreign extremist groups
have been briefed and debriefed by Headquarters
officers. The briefing has included appropriate
operational guidance, including defensive advice.
b. Americans with existing extremist creden-
tials have been assessed, recruited, tested and
dispatched abroad for PCS assignments as contract
agents, primarily sources offered for such use by
the FEI. When abroad they collect information re-
sponsive to MICILAOS program requirements, as well
as other Agency requirements. They are thus used
primarily for targeting against Cubans, Chinese Com-
munists, the North Vietnamese, etc., as their back-
ground and their particular access permits. It
should be noted that the MPTROIKA aspect of the
MPLODESTAR project of the East Asia Division is
similar to the MICHAOS PROGRAM.
3. As indicated earlier, MHCHAOS is a foreign pro-
gram, conducted overseas, except for the limited activity
described above. The program is and has been managed so
as to achieve the maximum feasible utilization of exist-
ing resources of the Operations Directorate. No assets
SENSITIVE
SECRET
1. Central Cover Staff (CCS) is responsible for the
placement of Agency operational personnel under the cover
of bona fide U.S. companies abroad and in the U.S. This
process involves the selection of companies; research on
their locations and key personnel; clearances; contacts
with companies to solicit cooperation with the Agency;
arrangements for integration of Agency personnel into the
companies, including letters of understanding; funding of
salarios, allowances and expenses; and, continuous monitor-
ing of each integrated case throughout the course of the
cover use. The overall objective is to match the individual
being placed, the company, and the location, in a manner
that will ensure achievement of the Agency purpose and pro-
tection of the company integrity.
2. Currently, there are 191 integrees for whom cover
is provided by 140 companies; 179 integrees are located in
47 foreign countries and 12 are located in the United States.
To maintain this placement level, CCS personnel are re-
searching and monitoring approximately 250 to 300 companies
at any given time.
3. To minimize the adverse consequences to a cooperating
company, and to preserve the Agency's operational equity in
the event of exposure of an individual under cover, it has
been established policy that no more than two individuals
would be furnished cover by the same company. At the present
time this ratio is confined to approximately 25% of the total
number of companies now being used and efforts are under
way to effect further reductions toward the goal of one
individual per company.
4. In addition to the primary corporate cover function
described in paragraph 1. above, CCS maintains continuing
contact with two U.S. car rental firms and two U.S. credit
card firms for the purpose of obtaining backstopped credit
cards in alias for operational use in the United States and
abroad by Agency personnel. 42 such cards are now being
used by 34 individuals.
SECRET
1. Central Cover Staff (CCS) maintains 31l back-
stopped notional facilities which were created to pro-
vide cover for Agency personnel in the United States
and abroad and to provide an attributable source for
Agency funds used in operations and requiring conceal-
ment of Agency or U.S. Government interest. The facilities
comprise 43 corporations providing personal status cover,
payrolling and tax attribution sources, and other miscel-
laneous support such as title to property, funding, etc.;
61 sole-proprietorships providing status and operational
cover, including payrolling and tax attribution; and 207
non-registered companies providing support for high risk
operational requirements, agents abroad, corporate reim-
bursements, and proprietary funding.
2. 224 Agency personnel engaged in operational
activities are payrolled by the facilitics, an essential
procedure permitting the reporting of Agency salaries with-
out documenting the Agency as the source.
3. The facilities provide a capability for passing
Agency funds to 30 Agency proprietaries and 97 bona fide
companies on a continuing basis. 225 bank accounts
located in 36 banks throughout the United States provide
the mechanisms for transmittal of those funds.
SECRET
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Operations
SUBJECT: Soviet Defector
A Soviet defector,
defected to a representative of this Agency in
1964. The responsibility for
his exploitation was assigned to the then SR Division of
the Clandestine Service and he was brought to this country
After initial interrogation by
representatives of the SR Division, he was moved to a safe-
house in
Maryland,
where he
was confined and interrogated until 13 August 1965 when
he was moved to a specially constructed "jail" in a remote
wooded area at ISOLATION. The SR Division was convinced
that he was a dispatched agent but even after a long
period of hostile interrogation was unable to prove their
contention and he was confined at/ISOLATION in an effort
to convince him to "confess."
This Office together with the Office of General
Counsel became increasingly concerned with the illegality
of the Agency's position in handling a defector, under
these conditions for such a long period of time. Strong
representations were made to the Director 1 (Mr. Helms) by
this Office, the Office of General Counsel, and the
Legislative Liaison Counsel, and on 27 October 1967, the
responsibility for his further handling was transferred
to the Office of Security under the direction of the Deputy
Director of Central Intelligence, then Admiral Rufus Taylor.
The Soviet defector
was moved to a comfortable safehouse in
the Washington area and was interviewed under friendly,
sympathetic conditions by his Security Case Officer, Mr.
Bruce Solie for more than a year. It soon became apparent
that the Soviet defector was bona fide and he was moved to
more comfortable surroundings with considerable freedom
of independent movement and has continued to cooperate
fully with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and this
Office since that time. He has proven to be the most
valuable and economical defector this Agency has ever
had and leads which were ignored by the SR Division were
explored and have resulted in the arrest and prosecution
of Soviet recruited agents in several
countries throughout the world. He currently is living
under an alias; secured a divorce from his Russian wife
and remarried an American citizen. He is happy, relaxed,
and appreciative of the treatment accorded him and states
"while I regret my years of incarceration, I have
no bitterness and now understand how it could happen."
SECRET
EYES ONLY
I. SURVEILLANCES
A. SIESTA
During the periods 1-20 February, 12 April-7 May,.
and 9-20 August 1971, a surveillance was conducted of
Miss Deborah Fitzgerald, a former staff employee, and
Orlando Toro Nunez, a Cuban national with whom
Miss Fitzgerald had become professionally and emo-
tionally involved. Surveillance was predicated upon
information that Miss Fitzgerald had been seeking from
employees information in Information Processing Division
files, and that employees were visiting a photographic
studio operated by Miss Fitzgerald and Nunez in Fairfax
City, Virginia. In addition to physical surveillance,
one surreptitious entry of the photographic studio was
made, and an attempt to enter the apartment of Nunez
was aborted because of a door lock problem.
B. PARAGON
Pursuant to a request from the CI Staff, approved
by the DCI, surveillances were conducted of Iden 69
and her associates at various times from May to September
1971. Iden 69 an acknowledged Latin American revolu-
tionary, had long been a source of the WH Division and
had given information regarding a plot to assassinate
or kidnap Vice-President-Agnow and the DCI. Surveil-
lances included coverage of the activities of Iden 69.
during two visits to the United States, technical cover-
age of debriefings of her by WH Division representatives
in New York City, and surveillance, including mail cover-
age, of several American citizens alleged to be part of
the plot. Although most of the surveillance occurred in
New York City, surveillance of one of the individuals
included extensive coverage of a commune in Detroit.
C. GELOTEX I
At the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was con-
ducted of Iden 180 of the Washington Post during
the periods 6-9 October, 27 October-10 December 1971
and on 3 January 1972. In addition to physical sur-
veillance, an observation post was maintained in the
Statler Hilton Hotel where observation could be main-
tained of the building housing his office. The sur-
veillance was designed to determine Iden 180 sources
of classified information of interest to the Agency
which had appeared in a number of his columns.
D. MUDHEN
At the direction of the DCI, surveillance was con-
ducted of Jack Anderson and at various times his "leg
men," Britt Hume, Leslie Whitten, and Joseph Spear,
from 15 February to 12 April 1972. In addition to the
physical surveillance, an observation post was main-
tained in the Statler Hilton Hotel directly oppošite
Anderson's office. The purpose of this surveillance
was to attempt to determine Anderson's sources for
highly classified Agency information appearing in his
syndicated columns.
E. BUTANE
At the direction of the DCI, a surveillance was
conducted on Victor L. Marchetti from 23 March to
20 April 1972. The purpose of this surveillance was
to determine his activities and contacts both with
Agency employees and other individuals in regard to
his proposed book and published magazine articles ex-
posing Agency operations.
II. POLICE SUPPORT
A. During 1969, 1970, and 1971, on several occasions,
the Intelligence Division of the Metropolitan Police
Department was provided a communications system to
monitor major anti-Vietnam war demonstrations in the
Washington area. This system consisted of a radio
receiver and an Agent at the Intelligence Division
Headquarters and several automobiles from an Agency
Field Office equipped with radio receivers and trans-
mitters and manned bytwo Agency employees, as well asia
representative of the Intelligence Division, Metropolitan
Police Department. The benefit to the Agency was that
the communications over this system were monitored at
the Headquarters Building to provide instant notice of
possible actions by the dissidents against Agency in-
stallations.
B. During the period from 1968 to 1973, several
items of positive audio equipment consisting pri-
marily of clandestine transmitters and touch-tone
dial recorders were loaned to the Metropolitan
Police Department, Fairfax-County, - Virginia, Police
Department, Montgomery County, Maryland, Police
Department, New York City Police Department, and the
San Francisco, California, Police Department.
III. GENERAL SUPPORT
A. SRPOINTER
Since 1953, this office has operated a mail inter-
cept program of incoming and outgoing Russian mail
and, at various times, other selective mail at Kennedy
Airport in New York City. This operation included not
only the photographing of envelopes but also surrepti-
tious opening and photographing of selected items of
mail. The bulk of the take involved matters of inter-
nal security interest which was disseminated to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. This program is now
in a dormant state pending a decision as to whether
the operation will be continued or abolished.
B. AELADLE
For several years the Office of Security has pro-
vided support to a Russian defector of
interest to the CI Staff. This support has consisted
of numerous things, including documentation for a change
of identity on three occasions.
C. REDFACE
In July 1970, this office made a surreptitious
entry of an office in Silver Spring, Maryland, occu-
pied by a former defector working under contract for
the Agency. This involved by-passing a contact and
sonic alarm system, entering a vault, and entering
a safe within the vault. The purpose of the opera-
tion was to determine whether the individual had
any unauthorized classified information in his
possession.
D. BUREAU OF NARCOTICS AND DANGEROUS DRUGS
In January 1971, the Director approved a request
from the Director, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, to provide covert recruitment and security
clearance support to BNDD. This has been accomplished
through the medium of a proprietary of the Office of
Security operating in Falls Church, Virginia. Support
includes covert recruitment, investigation, polygraph,
medical clearance, and training. It has been divided
into three phases: (1) A CI operation to place indi-
viduals in BNDD field offices to monitor any illegal
activities of other BNDD employees; (2) Recruitment
of Chinese or Spanish speaking covert Agents; and (3)
Recruitment of an individual used as an Agent by BNDD
but actually employed by BNDD, although this fact is
known only to the Director and Chief Inspector, BNDD.
In this case, arrangements were made for all pay and
other employee benefits to come from CIA CI on a reim-
bursable basis.
E. KITTENS PROJECT
As a result of a request from the Department of
State, approved by the DCI, this office has, since
October 1972, provided protection on a 24-hour basis
to two sons of a foreign leader who are attending school
in the United States. This support includes
the financing of the protection and the detail to the
Department of State of six armed Agents of this office
who are documented as State Department Office of Security
employees.
F. MERR-IMAG
From February 1967 to November 1971, an
Office of Security proprietary, recruited and handled
several Agents for the purpose of covertly monitoring
dissident groups in the Washington area considered
to be potential threats to Agency personnel and
installations. One of these Agents so successfully
penetrated one dissident group that the Agent was turned
over to the FBI for handling. In addition, during
this period, the Office of Security field offices
were tasked with collecting available intelligence
on dissident groups. All such information was in-
cluded in a periodic report distributed to appro-
priate parts of the Agency and to certain outside
Government agencies.
G. ANTLERS
Several months ago, at the request of CI Staff,
and with the approval of the DDP and the DCI, this
office arranged to move a sensitive defector out of
a European country via commercial transportation and
gain entry into the United States without leaving
any trace of his true identity.
SECRET
EYES ONLY
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE RECORD
SUBJECT: General: Office of Security Survey
1. At the Director's instruction, and with the concurrence
of the then DD/P, the Office of Security developed informants in
RID to report on the activities of RID employees on whom security
questions had arisen. This program, which included upwards of a
dozen informants at its peak, has declined to its present level of
three, only one of whom is reporting regularly on matters of current
interest.
2. The principal object of Security's interest through this
informant is a female who was employed in RID for a number of years
until she resigned in 1969. Her resignation coincided with the initiation
of a security review on her by the Office of Security, but Security does
not know whether the employee was aware of this security review at
the time of her resignation.
3. Security's interest in this employee was occasioned by
reports that she had developed an increasingly intimate acquaintance
with a Cuban national. Reporting by one informant, who was also
being developed by the Cuban, suggested that the Cuban might have
an intelligence interest in the female. The same informant also sub-
sequently reported that the Cuban had numerous other contacts among
clerical and secretarial employees of the Agency. Among these
employees is one girl who works in a biographic section in SB Division.
4. Subsequent to her departure from the Agency, the ex-RID
employee entered into a common-law marital relationship with the
Cuban and joined him as partner in a photographic business. In this
capacity she solicited business among CIA employees, especially
those requiring passport photos. Recently, she and the Cuban sought
to employ Security's informant in this business on a part-time basis.
5. Information on the background of the Cuban is fairly extensive,
but it is inconclusive. He is known to have been a member of anti-
Castro organizations this country. There are all reports that
his mother was imprisoned in Cuba at one time. There are other
episodes in his life that suggest intelligence involvement on his part
with some hostile service, but this is not yet definitely established.
6. The Office of Security has had at times a second informant
in this case. His reporting has tended to confirm reporting by the
principal informant.
7. There is conclusive evidence that the Cuban expressed
interest in certain 201 files in the Agency, and there are good grounds
for believing that the RID female employee delivered at least one such
file to the Cuban while she was still in RID. There is also evidence
that the female employee in SB Division has continued in frequent
contact with her friend, the ex-RID employee, and the Cuban. On
one occasion, she served as intermediary for contact instructions
from the Cuban to O/S's principal informant. The informant has no
knowledge, however, of any other requirements that may have been
levied on or satisfied by the SB employee. Neither does he know of
the extent of contacts by this couple with other Agency employees
except social contacts.
8. The Office of Security has been running this operation for
over two years, in an effort to obtain conclusive proof of its intelli-
gence nature. CI Staff has been kept informed. The FBI, which
was informed of the case at an early stage, has declined to take re-
sponsibility for it, on grounds that it concerns CLA's internal security.
As a result, the Office ofSecurity has been inhibited in the actions
it can take against the Cuban suspect. On the other hand, Security
has not taken any action against Agency employees for fear of com-
promising the operation.
9. It would appear to me that the Office of Security has dallied
with this case long enough. Apparently unable through positive measures
to resolve doubts about the case. O/S has followed the course of watch-
ful waiting, hoping the Cuban would take precipitant action himself that
would give us the evidence we seek. In the meantime, our knowledge
of the relationship between the Cuban and the several other current
Agency employees with whom he is known to have contact continues
to be quite limited. Neither the Cuban nor his girlfriend have made
any further approaches to Security's informant recently, although he
continues to see them ocially. Thus, there is slineason to believe
that further waiting will produce a break in the case.
10. There are two courses open to the Office of Security now.
It can attempt to have the Agency employees known to be in contact
with the Cuban transferred to nonsensitive positions. This might
alert the Cuban to our penetration of the operation, particularly
since a plausible reason for transfer would be difficult to develop
for some of the persons involved. Alternatively, Security could
move overtly and charge the Agency employees with violation of the
security regulation requiring reporting of contacts with foreign
nationals. This would, of course, terminate the Office of Security's
operation.
11. One of these courses of action should be chosen promptly.
The possibility that the employee in SB Division may be passing
information on CIA's Soviet operations is too great to warrant further
delay in moving against her. Moreover, it is possible that the Cuban
has current productive penetrations of RID. Thus, the risk of damage
to the Agency seems clearly to outweigh any possible gains from
continuing this CI effort.
John Q. Lawrence
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Management & Services
SUBJECT: Press Allegations re Use of Agency
Polygraph
1. This memorandum is for your information only
and confirms a report I made to you by telephone earlier
today.
2. On 22 July 1971, an article was carried on
American proposals relative to the SALT talks in The New
York Times over the by-line of Iden 181. It was
devastatingly accurate and contained direct quotes from
a Presidential advisory memorandum the White House had
sent to Mr. Gerard Smith, Director, Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency, a few days earlier. The President
was alleged to be furious with this unauthorized dis-
closure of classified information and directed a sweeping
investigation within the United States Government to
determine the source of the disclosure. Investigation
was conducted under the direction of Mr. Egil Krogh and
Mr. David Young, Staff Assistants to Mr. John Ehrlichman,
Counsel to the President for Domestic Affairs.
3. On the basis of investigations conducted by
State Security and Defense officials, four individuals--
one individual in the Department of Defense and three
individuals in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency--
were tabbed as leading suspects. Mr. Egil Krogh contacted
me on 26 July 1971 and requested that we arrange to polygraph
the three suspects in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
and volunteered the information that the Federal Bureau of
Investigation would be asked to polygraph the one suspect
in the Department of Defense.
4. I informed Mr. Krogh that from time to time
in matters involving the national security the Agency had
detailed to Mr. G. Marvin Gentile, Director of State
Security, a polygraph operator and a polygraph machine for
his use in polygraphing State Department employees who
were recipients of allegations concerning their loyalty.
I emphasized that this procedure had the Director's
approval and that State clearly understood that the examin-
ation was their total responsibility. I further informed
him that this was the only way we could undertake to enter-
tain his request and that even then it would require the
specific approval of the Director. Mr. Krogh asked me to
obtain such approval and work out such arrangements with
Mr. Gentile.
5. Later that same day, Mr. Krogh called Mr. Gentile
and inquired as to whether the arrangements had been made.
Mr. Gentile indicated they had and suggested that the same
polygraph operator be used to examine the Defense suspect.
Mr. Krogh informed Mr. Gentile that he considered this an
excellent idea and that he would instruct Defense officials
to make their man available to Mr. Gentile for a polygraph
examination.
6. The four individuals were Iden 182
of the Department of Defense and Iden 183
Iden 184
Iden 185
of
and
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. The polygraph
examinations resulted in clearing the four men and the
results of the examinations were forwarded over my signature
to Mr. Gentile on 29 July 1971. A copy of my covering
memorandum is attached.
7. Iden 186, a staff writer for The
Washington Post, in an article dated 3 September 1971,
stated that a State Department spokesman had acknowledged
at a news briefing that agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation had polygraphed State Department employees
suspected of leaking information on the SALT talks in
July. Mr. John Edgar Hoover, then Director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, denied this allegation in a
letter to The Washington Post and said that the polygraph
examinations had been conducted by another agency. Specu-
lation centered around the Agency, but after a day or so,
press speculation in this regard died away.
8. Iden 186 apparently has never been satisfied
and has been pressing Mr. Charles Bray, State Department
spokesman, for confirmation of Agency involvement. Mr.
Bray learned today that Iden 186 plans to use a press
conference to be held at 2:00 p.m. this afternoon to press
this point further. Mr. Bray has been given guidance by
Mr. Gentile to avoid confirmation but if this is impossible
he will indicate the examinations were conducted by State
Department Security officials utilizing an operator and
a machine detailed to the Department for this purpose. I
do not know whether or not the fact that the government-wide