157-10014-10005
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Date: 08/06/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10005
RECORDS SERIES: HEARINGS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 01-H-05
ORIGINATOR: SSCSGO
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
FROM: ANGLETON, JAMES
TO:
TITLE:
DATE: 06/19/75
PAGES: 113
SUBJECTS: ANGLETON, JAMES
USSR
CIA
FBI
NOSENKO, YURI
CIA, RELATIONSHIP WITH WC
OSWALD, LEE, RUSSIAN PERIOD
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: NOT ASSASSINATION RELATED
CURRENT STATUS: RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 09/25/98
OPENING CRITERIA:
COMMENTS: Box 1
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423393 Page 1
76000011404
KW 50933 DOCIU:32423393 Page 2
TOP SECRET
The Nuited States Senate
R378
Report of Proceedings
2/15/77
Hearing held before
Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities
Thursday, June 19, 1975
Washington, D. C.
(Stenotype Tape and Waste turned over
to the Committee for destruction)
WARD & PAUL
410 FIRST STREET, S. E.
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20003
(202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
76000011405
NW 50933 DocId:32423393 Page 3
TOP SECRET
CONTENTS
TESTIMONY OF
James Angleton
PAGE
2
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Area 202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
EXECUTIVE SESSION
Thursday, June 19, 1975
United States Senate,
Select Committee to Study Government
Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities,
Washington, D. C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m.,
in Room S.123, The Capitol, Senator John G. Tower, presiding.
Present: Senators Tower (presiding), Baker and Mathias.
Also present: William Miller, Staff Director; Frederick
A. O. Schwarz, Jr., Chief Counsel; Charles Kirbow and David
Aaron, Professional Staff Members.
TOP SECRET
NW 509JJ Faye 4
76000011406
Senator Tower. Mr. Angleton, I understand that you came
on very short notice. And I appreciate your accommodating
the Committee.
You will have to be sworn.
Would you rise, please, and raise your right hand?
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you are about
to give before this committee is the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Angleton. I do.
Senator Tower. Counsel, you may proceed.
TESTIMONY OF JAMES ANGLETON
Mr. Schwarz. I would like to first get your name and
address on the record.
Mr. Angleton. James Angleton, Arlington, Virginia.
Mr. Schwarz. Just some procedural matters. You have a
right to counsel, you understand that?
Mr. Angleton. Yes, I understand it.
Mr. Schwarz. And if at any time you want to stop to ob-
tain counsel you have a right to do that. And if you wish
to claim any of your Constitutional rights you have a right
to do that, you understand those things also, do you?
Mr. Angleton. Yes, I understand them.
Mr. Schwarz. You were employed at the CIA for what
period of time?
Mr. Angleton. From the beginning until December, the
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 5
76000011407
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Ares 202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
end of December.
Mr. Schwarz. 1974?
Mr. Angleton. 1974.
Mr. Schwarz. And were you the Chief of Counterintelligenco
at the CIA for that period?
Mr. Angleton. I was.
Mr. Schwarz. For that entire period of time?
Mr. Angleton. No, from 1954.
Mr. Schwarz.
with Israeli intelligence agencies?
Mr. Angleton. That is correct.
Mr. Schwarz. Can you briefly state the connection, if any,
between your counter intelligence work and the Israeli work,
or put even more generally, how did you happen to have both
those jobs?
Mr. Angleton. Well, if I could ask you some clarifica-
tion, are we addressing ourselves here in terms of
this meeting to the Szule business, or are we trying to take
up everything?
Mr. Schwarz. No, we are not going to try to take up
everything. We may try to take up a few things beyond the
Szulc business. What we are trying to do
Mr Angleton. I can direct my answers to you better
if I know more where we are going.
Mr. Schwarz. We are going to the Szulc business, but it
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423393 Page 6
7600011129
NBR
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Ares 2021 544-600
TOP SECRET
it would be helpful to have a few background first.
Senator Baker. If I may say so, so that Mr. Angleton
will not be taken by surprise, there are one or two things that
I would like to discuss. The nature of that material would be
similar to what you have already discussed with Rockefeller,
having to do with the Oswald situation and other things.
Mr. Angleton. Well, to begin with, I went into OSS in
1943, in 1943 from the infantry. And then Iwas assigned to an
embryonic counter intelligence unit under General
Donovan. My immediate chief was James R. Murphy, who had been
a protegee and obtained his law degree in General Donovan's
office. And he is a practicing attorney here in Washington.
And he was Chief of X-2, which was the counter intelligence.
And during that time a number of us were put together who
had never had any experience in the subject. And that included
people such as Jonnie Oaks, who was the head of the editorial
page of the New York Times, and Ben Wells and a tremendous
cross-section of American life.
And there was a training intensive in this country, and
I was sent to London. And the purpose of that was to ab-
sorb the British experience, and more important the breaking
of German codes.
The breaking of the German codes, which is relevant to
our activity, was really done in England. And by way of
digression, the Germans were using a receiver machine called
NW 5 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 7
TOP SECRET
Enigma, the blue prints of which were originally obtained by
a Frenchman. And I might add that the Frenchman never re-
ceived credit for it. And yet that perhaps was the most
single important breakthrough of the entire war. And he had
obtained it about eitht to nine or ten years prior to the out-
break of war, when it was non-operative. And he had the
prescience to know that the systems could only be one thing,
that it would be operative in a time of war.
I give this digression simply to point out that the
fruits of that breakthrough would first go to the military
and the military operations. And the counter intelligence
use of it would be the bottom of the list of priorities, in
one sense.
But it would mean that a compromise of the material
in any fashion to the Germans would destroy the military
uses. And during the war or when the Germans went into the
war, they brought it up from 10 percent recovery to about
100 percent.
And believe it was in the neighborhood of some 22,000
operational messages from the German high command. I know
the Battle of Tobruk was fought on six intercepts.
So our job was to make use of the counter intelligence
for the purpose of playing back German agents to their high
command. And this was an elaborate deception. And when the
war ended I would say that 99 percent of all reporting agents
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423393 Page 8
76000011410
NBR
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Ares 202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
that the Germans had were under our control. And in fact
when many of the German hierarchy tried to escape to the
west under aliases, their only point of contact for most
documentation and money was to our agent under control.
And it was called the Safe Haven program.
So London was in a sense a staging area with full access
to British, or the fruits of British activity, going back
through their entire history. And it was the advance head-
quarters for General Donovan, and Mr. Murphy.
I was then sent to Italy in 1943. And I took over the
counter intelligence for Italy the OSS, AFIHO, Allied Forces
Headquarters.
Subsequently I became the Chief of OSS Italy.
I want to say that my work then became more broad in terms of
espionage and all the other branches of OSS. And I re-estab-
lished the counter/intelligence services. And I brought the
French back into existence, particularly the man who
originally acquired the code, and who worked on it for many
years. And by this time it was shifted to the Saudi bloc.
I left Italy in 1947 or 1948 and came back, and was
discharged and went into the Agency immediately. And during
the period I was in the Agency, of course, I had both agent
operations, long distance operations, and counter intelligence,
and some sabotage, black propaganda, infiltration.
And probably the first overnight operation that there was
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 9
76000011411
which was known as Plan Hope, which is simply putting the
Italians in an airplane and having them fly over to the
Roumanian border and make very primitive photographs of the
whole region.
And I was sent back to the Air Force. And then I had
code operations, embassy penetrations, and so on.
So, in a sense the resuscitation of the Italian service,
Army and Navy, Air Force, and the Minister of the Interior,
was American rehabilitation. And am not going to go into
the details of the political situation. There was the
civil war in Greece, and the revival of the international
Brigade and in fact the Soviets had built up, when they were
not fighting the war, in the post-wat period, assassinations,
and instability.
And throughout this we had very close supervision from
Mr. Murphy, and General Donovan. And we had special interest
in the Vatican, and what was happening in Berlin behind the
Curtain.
And the then acting Secretary of State for the Vatican,
Montini who is the present Pope. And so there was much
to do through our channels, and General Donovan, with Montini,
the Rope, who is now the Pope, one of the basic problems was
the cold war. We did not buy the cold war, it came to us
and we worked with the Germans, and as we broke down the
opposition, we began to find that we were not getting the
TOP SECRET
NW 30933 DUCIQ:32423393 Page 10
76000011412
Germans, we were getting the Soviets.
But the penetrations and the operations which wegran
during the military phase began to take on a character of
their own in the civilian phase in the very long term Soviet
objectives against the U.S. in particular, and against the
allies.
And then I got into all fields of labor, subversion,
illegal immigrants, and then revolution. I was in Greece.
And our penetrations at that period were fairly high level and
sophisticated, because of the reaction to Stalin.
And as the Soviet troops occupied new territories, it
was faced with these ambiguities, the defectors coming
over to us at very high levels.
And in the course of this, of course, was the Israeli
immigration. Technically we were still a part of AFHQ, which
was a combined and Allied Headquarters. And the British desires
were that our activities be directed in supporting their
responsibilities in the Middle East, and, therefore, to pre-
vent the immigration.
And I think the only policy cable that was ever re-
ceived during that period was one we sent to Mr. Murphy, and
through General Donovan to the President. That
was where we exercised our influences on the Italians to
prevent immigration. And they addressed themselves to this
issue, and they came back with an ambiguity, but it leaned
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 11
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Ares 202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
toward the general proposition that we should not
discourage the British nor hurt the British directly, but
we should not interfere with the Italians to support the
British position.
And so my dealings were with Admiral Maugeria, who
had been Chief of the Italian Naval Intelligence, but was
then the Commanding Admiral of the Turanian Fleet generally
south, where all these illegal immigrants collected and were
sent down.
And then they blew up the Irgum, and blew up the British
embassy in Rome, who were my opposite numbers. And the man
with whom we had set up as the Italian intelligence through
the rest of the Israelis -- we had the members of the
group, and then we had the dilemma again as to whether we
turned them over to the British authorities, and so on.
And we were in a position to make decisions one way or
the other. And eventually we came down on the side of re-
leasing them.
And there is so much more of it. I am trying to keep
the thread of it.
Mr. schwarz. So you developed some kind of a relation-
ship, perhaps a friendly relationship, with persons connected
with the new State of Israel or the hoped-for state of
Israeli back in the 1940's?
Mr. Angleton. That is right.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 12
76000011413
Mr. Schwarz. And was there any other significant reason
why you kept the Israeli account, if that is the right/ex-
pression?
Mr. Angleton. There wasn't one after I left there,
nor was there one here in Washington.
But the other side of the Israeli problem was that you
had thousands coming from the Soviet Union. And you had the
Soviets making use of the immigration for the purpose of
sending illegal agents into the West and breaking down all
the travel control, identifications and so on.
And so there was both a security problem and a political
problem. And one of my men married, I might say, the head of
the Zionist movement in Italy, the underground. So I had
a connection to this man. He was very important.
So, coming back to Washington, I was Special Assistant
to Colonal Donald/IH? Galloway, who was head of the
clandestine side and covered the world, on all sides of
clandestine activity.
And subsequently I was Chief of Operations for Es-
pionage.
And in 1954 I had a special operational unit, and was
made head of the counter intelligence.
Mr. Schwarz. In the period beginning in 1954 and lasting
until 1974, when you left the Agency, did you have any
relationship -- is the Israeli account the wrong way to say it?
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 13
76000011414
Mr. Angleton. It is all right. It is as good as my
other.
Mr. Schwarz. Did you have any relationship with the
Israeli account?
Mr.Angleton. No. That began in 1951. There was no
relationship between the Agency and the Israeli intelligence.
Mr. Schwarz. You mean at all, or prior to 1951.
Mr. Angleton. There wasn't any from 1947 -- 1946 on.
Mr. Schwarz. Then it began in 1951. And all
I am trying to establish and not spend a lot of time with it,
is, do you have any relationship with Israel, Israeli intelli-
gence, or the Israeli account on behalf of the Agency between
1951 and 1974.
Mr. Angleton. It was resonstituted in 1951. And I was the
negotiator of the arrangement. The Mayor of Jerusalem, Pete
Kollek, was at the other end of the negotiation. He was
stationed in Washington. But during the Jewish Agency period,
he was head of the intelligence in Turkey, during the war and
prior.
Mr. Miller. How was that agreement negotiated?
Mr Angleton. It was negotiated by finding what
we have in common. It was reviewed by Admiral Hillenkoetter,
who was then Director. And he was to be succeeded by General
Walter Bedell Smith. And the decision was made during the
war that Bedell Smith was to take over, and Allen Dulles returned
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 14
76000011415
to this activity, that we would go ahead and re-establish a
relationship. And after a lot of bureaucratic problems, they
gave me the account.
Mr. Miller. What ws the nature of the arrangement that
wasagreed upon between the two services?
Mr. Angleton. In most simplistic terms, they were in-
formed that we would not work with them against the Arabs,
that we would work with them on Soviet intelligence and
Soviet bloc Intelligence and communism, where it existed.
Mr. Schwarz. Did that agreement -- which I take it was
more flexible that -- but did it remain in effect throughout
the period of your service with the Agency?
Mr. Angleton. More or less.
Mr. Miller. Was this agreement in the form of a
paper?
Mr. Angleton. Paper and operations, discussion.
Mr. Miller. And under whose authority was the agree-
ment made?
Mr. Angleton. Under the authority of the Director of
Central Intelligence, and the Prime Minister of Israel on
the other side.
Mr. Miller. And this involved the exchange of resources
of both countries?
Mr. Angleton. The term "resources" is not quite
correct. Everything except their own people. It was giving
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DOCID:32423393 Page 15
76000011416
up papers and signals, communications intelligence, and all
the other products of intelligence action.
Mr. Miller. So the Director of Central Intelligence was
aware of the agreement. Was the President?
Mr. Angleton. The President was aware of it. And the
Secretary of State was the brother of the Deputy Chief of the
CIA, and eventually was very much involved.
Mr. Miller. Where is a record of this agreement kept,
as an instrument of the U.S.?
Mr. Angleton. The internal papers would be in the Agency.
The letters, copies of the letters from Ben Gurion to the
President or to the Secretary of State I assume are still in
the Agency. I dealt with other departments in connection
with Africa, and so on, underdeveloped areas.
If you are speaking as to whether there was a representa-
tive treaty which was cleared -- and people wanted these
things cleared -- I don't think there were any clearances
obtained from the Hill.
Mr. Miller. Was it regarded as an obligation or a
commitment/from the U.S. to Israel on certain matters?
Mr. Angleton. When you use the word U.S. while you
may use it as contracting officers and all that, there was
very little reduced to writing. And it is a custom of
Intelligence that intelligence supersedes writing. And
there have been very few directors to my knowledge that would
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 16
76000011417
put their pen to hand to sign an agreement to some unders-
standing. It is based on a fiduciary relationship and common
understanding.
So, these were all understandings that were
generated by events. WE had the arrest of the nine doctors,
and the pogrom in Russia. And obviously you didn't go through
a lot of bureaucracy, it was there for everyone to see.
And it had a direct impact on the question of immigration of
agents, and everything else that goes along with it. And
I think that characterizes any good operation.
Mr. Miller. How was it possible for succeeding directors
of the intelligence agency to understand what the
agreements were between in this case the Israeli intelligence
service and the U.S. Intelligence Service?
Mr. Angleton. Very simple. They saw the production to
begin with. And they met with directors or the head of
Israeli intelligence. And they met with Ambassadors and prime
ministers. And they were very much involved.
Mr. Schwarz. Just one more background question and
then we will turn to the principle subject.
Following through on the subject of Israel up to your
departure in 1974, is there any connection between your de-
parture and handling of Israel? And if there is, what is
the connection?
Mr. Angleton. Well, I think I have said it all to the
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 17
commission -- I don't know how wisely. You can always get
different information from different people. But Colby
told them, so I would like to give him the benefit of the
doubt on it. But over a period of time Colby, who is not my
cup of tea professionally or in any other way, and in my
view is on the negative side of life -- and Dr. Schlesinger,
before he went to Defense, said that Colby was the only other
person on Watergate. So you have got certain persons who
were prominent. And there was the negative aspect of
self-inspection, and inferiors reporting on superiors, until
they came through the snake pit.
And in the course of all of this there was time when
he assumed the authority, and in total contrast to Schlesinger,
he began to regard the Israeli account as something
thing where we had to open the windows and let the air in.
And he used phrases such as, we must help out llenry and a few
other things.
Any/position was that it was a political relationship,
and that we were not bound, or should not be bound to using
the Agency on tactical ventures when we had relationships
which had strategic implications.
But one must remember that there are still three
million Jews in the Soviet Union. And the relationship is the
only place where you do it with high level agencies who work
for ideology and do not work for money. So it is unique.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 18
76000011418
WARD & PAUL
410 First Street, S.E., Washington, D.C. 20003
Phone (Ares 202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
And my second point was that everything should be run
on the grounds of need-to-know, and should not go into the Arab
Division until there was peace in the area. There was no
identity of interest or fundamental interest between Israelis
and an example is 500 Polish intelligence officers who were
Jewish who immigrated to Israel. They knew more about Polish
intelligence than the Poles. And the Soviets had worked with
the Poles in the West, and trained them in Moscow, where you
had the cohesion of 27 bloc services working together through
their own congress party apparatus into a collective with
Moscow.
And most important, our job was to preserve the inte-
grity of the immigration from the bloc, because the problem
of escape to Israel is a religious problem, it is not a
political problem. There could not be a prime minister who
would survive the day if he did not go along with the idea of
the return.
And, therefore, there is a certain kind of parallelism,
you might say, between handling the communications intelligence
during the war and where a low priority makes use of it and
endangers the whole with the question of immigration,
where the fruits of that immigration come to this government.
(Recess.)
Senator Tower. Will you go ahead and resume the question
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 19
76000011419
Mr. Schwarz. You were in the middle of an answer, I
believe.
Mr. Angleton. What I am trying to say is that imm1-
grationis a source of very high level information, and it
is very comparable with its problems as communications intelligend
during the war when the lives of men were involved in troop
movements.
And, therefore the idea of opening up the doors and
things, and so on, to me seemed absolutely contrary to the
spirit, and what had been going on for 22 years.
And during that time we had obtained, for example, by
way of production, Khrushchev's secret speech which prac-
tically created revolutions in Hungary and Poland.
I was just simply reiterating the problem of the immi-
gration. This idea of opening the doors and letting the light
in, and breaking/down compartmentation, and breaking down
the need to know, would inevitably put in jeopardy, the immi-
gration, if the Soviets should learn the extent of the ac-
tivities.
Now, the production ran from everything, such as the
secret speech of Khrushchev's against Stalin, it ran into
the first hard information on nuclear explosives, and it
ran into practically the whole gamut. And I think in a cer-
tain period of time it resulted in over 22,000 reports deal-
ing with the Soviet bloc which were unique. And much of this
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 20
76000011420
came from, say, an engineer that had a factory, or what not,
in other words, it had a very direct bearing on our own
R&D and our own defense budget.
Now, our own way of handling it was to give false
attribution, reports, so that if the report was ever compro-
mised, it would not compromise the operations, or the immi-
gration. And, therefore, that was one of the issues.
On the other issue was that to politicize the Agency,
as I stated, on the tactical problems, which are going to
be with us for a long time.
And to break down the fiduciary relationship-- which is
after all a personal business -- all the men I have had, were
men who stayed in it and came back to headquarters and went back
to Tel Aviv, they went to the National Security Council, and
went back to Tal Aviv et cetera, a small group of men. It
was probably the most economical operation that has ever been
devised in the US. Government. I don't think there was more
than 10 people that were hired in the same process.
I started from the south side with two Jewish men who
worked with me during the war. He sent them over as ordinary
people under cover to establish the working hours of things,
and I brought over six others and put them through some months
of training, outside of the structure.
And one of them rose to be Deputy Chief of the Service.
But it is a part of the whole fiduciary business.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 21
For example, we had certain political overtones where
we were used in an affirmative way under President Eisenhower.
He wanted to make a real attempt to see if there could ever
be a peace in the Middle East. And with Alan Dulles, his
brothers, and myself, and Kermit Roosevelt, we put up a plan
to bringing in Robert B. Anderson, who had been Assistant
Secretary of the Defense.
And he was accredited as special emissary from the
President. And I handled his base to Israel, which was secret,
black, as we call them to see Ben Gurion and Shaffetz was
the Foreign Minister -- and Kollek, who was in the Prime Minis-
ter's office, and later Mayor --
And we took him back to Rome. And Kermit Roosevelt
would take him over to see Nasser. And this went on back
and forth on many trips, until the conclusions were reached
that there could not be any peace.
But those/types of initiatives could be done without
publicizing of without destroying it.
Mr. Schwarz. In any event, some dispute in connection
with these Israeli matters underlay your dispute with Mr.
Colby, which underlay your leaving the Agency?
Mr. Angleton. Yes. He offered me jobs or what not.
But these are matters of principle, as far as I am concerned.
Mr. Miller. Mr. Angleton, you described the fiduciary
relationship. Were there points along the way where the U.S.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 22
76000011421
interests and the interests of Israel were in conflict?
Mr. Angleton. We never got into that. Of course, you
only had to read the paper every day to see that.
Mr. Miller. But how did they come up? You say they
didn't come up at all?
Mr. Angleton. Of course, they came up. There
wasn't anything secret about it.
Mr Miller. But what examples can you give?
Mr Angleton. The recent visit of Rabun is a classic
case. The so-called reassessment of the Middle East. The
Times has better accounts of it than the Agency has.
Mr. Miller. I mean at your level.
Mr. Angleton. I don't quite get the thrust of your
question.
Mr. Miller. What I am saying is that you had an unusually
close relationship --
Mr. Angleton. It was not unusual. I have had it
with many chiefs of services in 80 different countries, so
it is not any more unusual than a lot of others. The French-
man who got the code is closer to me than the
Israelis are.
Mr. Miller. Similar to the relationship --
Mr. Angleton. I don't like the word unusual because to
me it is usual.
Mr. Miller. Delete that. If your working relationship
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 23
76000011422
with the Israelis, where you had conflict of U.S. interests --
Mr. Angleton. Give me an example of what you regard
as a conflict.
Mr. Miller. Can you thing of any?
Mr. Angleton. You are the one who is posing it. I think
a lot of these things are illusions. But what would you regard
as a conflict? I don't think there is a conflict regarding
the Soviet Union or the balance of power. I don't think there
is any questions in my view --
Senator Mathias. May I suggest Suez as a conflict that
might have posed --
Mr. Angleton. Which Suez are we talking about?
Senator Mathias. The Israeli-British-French attack on Suez.
Mr. Angleton. The U.S. Government position was that we
had no commitments with Israel and we had no binding treaties.
We had two allies that had just fought a war with us, and
both of whom betrayed us. And Eden's head went with it. And that
is very clear and well documented. The Israelis were not
blamed because we didn't have any agreements with them, they
had violated no agreements. The British had agreements.
The British tried to give us a deception plan, should they
have naval vessels in the Mediterranean, and they were there
for a different purpose.
Mr. Kirbow. Let me see if I can make a point on just a
common sense level.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 24
76000011423
Senator Mathias. Let me follow this Suez question a
little more closely.
That is a point at which the U.S. policy differed from
the policy which was adopted by British and France and Israel?
Mr. Angleton. Correct.
Senator Mathias. And would a situation of that sort con-
front you with difficulties in your operations because --
Mr. Angleton. There have always been crises with them.
Senator Mathias. And how do you resolve a crisis of
that kind?
Mr. Angleton. You don't see the fellow for a few
days.
Mr. Miller. I see.
So your method was to deal with them on those matters --
Mr. Angleton. A total neutrality of interest.
Mr. Schwarz. Could we turn to the subject of atomic
technology?
Mr. Kirbow. Excuse me. I think for the record we should
make it clear, I think Mr. Angleton has had an interview
with the staff, and he has been made aware that a witness
testified here under oath as to certain matters and that that
is the approach that we are going to take now.
Is that clear?
Mr. Schwarz. I want to ask the question generally
first and then come to the other testimony.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423393 Page 25
Mr. Angleton, has the Central Intelligence Agency directly
or indirectly transferred any atomic technology or know-how to
Israel?
Mr. Angleton. From my knowledge, the answer is an abso-
luterno. That would be one of those grounds that Mr. Miller
was referring to, where the Agency, in the person of
Mr. John McCone, had some of the sharpest words probably in the
history of the relationship.
Mr. Schwarz. You mentioned those at lunch, and you might
just put that on the record.
Mr. Angleton. I want to state that to my knowledge the
Israelis themselves never raised the question of their atomic
capability or their atomic interests, with one or
two small exceptions, which was where there had