157-10014-10178
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10178
RECORD SERIES : MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-83
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE: 00/00/1975
PAGES: 161
SUBJECTS: CASTRO, FIDEL
LUMUMBA, PATRICE, ASSASSINATION
CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: 1B; IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 05/31/2000
OPENING CRITERIA : CC Box 73
COMMENTS:
v9.1
NW. 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 1
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10178
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-83
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TO :
TITLE :
DATE: 00/00/75
PAGES: 161
SUBJECTS: LUMUMBA, PATRICE, ASSASSINATION
CIA
CASTRO, FIDEL
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/19/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CC Box 73
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 2
INTERVIEW AND MEETING SUMMARY
3/31/27
'BC
INTERVIEW WITH: Congo Chief of Station
REGARDING: Lumumba Assassination Plan and Related Events
in the Congo.
DATE-TIME-LOCATION: August 20, 1975 12:30-3:30p.m. -
Room 608, Carroll Arms
PRESENT: Burton Wides, Rhett Dawson, Frederick Baron
HAS OR SHOULD BE DIGESTED:
FOLLOW UP REQUIRED:
MATERIALS SUBMITTED BY INTERVIEWEE(S):
EXECUTIVE SESSION: YES X NO
NW 50955 DocId:32423566 Page 3
MEMORANDUM
TO: Files
FROM: Frederick Baron
DATE: August 20, 1975
SUBJECT: Interview with Congo Chief of Station: Lumumba Assassination
Plan and Related Events in the Congo
Staff Members Present: Burton Wides, Rhett Dawson,
Frederick Baron
The following is a summary of the contents of an interview
conducted with a former CIA officer concerning a period (1960-1961)
in which he was Chief of Station in the Congo. The interview was
conducted from 12:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. today in Room 608 of the
Carroll Arms Hotel.
At the request of the Chief of Station (COS), we agreed to
take his testimony under alias. He will be referred to hereinafter
as "COS".
COS GOES TO CONGO AND RECEIVES MESSENGER FROM HEADQUARTERS
COS said that he arrived in the Congo as Chief of Station in
early July (probably the 10th or 11th) 1960. COS said that before
he left Headquarters for the Congo he did not talk with either
Richard Bissell (DDP) or Bronson Tweedy (Chief, Africa Division)
about the prospect of assassinating Patrice Lumumba. Soon after
arriving in the Congo, COS was asked to return to Headquarters in
late July for briefings. He said there was no talk of assassination
at those meetings, either.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 4
-2-
After his return to the Congo, probably in early September,
COS received a cable from Headquarters that said, in his words,
"someone I would recognize would appear to give me instructions for
a mission I would carry out." Soon thereafter Sidney Gottlieb
arrived in the Congo to meet with COS. COS recognized Gottlieb
from the Technical Services Division at the CIA, and it was made
clear that Gottlieb was the messenger referred to in the cable.
Gottlieb and COS met in COS's new apartment. COS dated this
meeting by the fact that he had moved into this apartment in early
September, 1960. COS said that Gottlieb informed him that lethal
biological agents had been developed for the assassination of
Lumumba. COS believes that Gottlieb brought a poison virus and
probably two other lethal biological agents with him in his bag.
But COS said it was possible that the biological weapons arrived
shortly thereafter. COS said that Gottlieb also provided rubber
gloves, a gauze mask, and probably a hypodermic syringe equipment
for administering the poisonous substances. The poisonous substances
were to be injected into food, drink, toothpaste, or anything else
that Lumumba might ingest. COS did not remember the appearance of
the biological agents themselves, but he did recall that there were
approximately three different types of lethal substances provided
to him.
COS said that he was "taken aback" by Gottlieb's assignment
to him of the assassination of Lumumba. COS said that he was a
junior Chief of Station, and he wanted to make sure to "pin down"
the chain of authority for this assignment because "I had never
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 5
-3-
heard of anything like this." COS's best recollection was that he
had the following interchange with Sidney Gottlieb:
COS: Where did this brilliant idea come from?
Gottlieb : The top.
COS: Who at the top?
Gottlieb: The Director has instructions from President
Eisenhower.
COS said that he could not recall the exact language of the
interchange, although this was his best recollection. He said
Gottlieb made it clear that the President wanted to find a way to
remove Lumumba from the scene. He said that when Gottlieb explained
the source of authorization for the assassination plot, he made it
clear that the President was the source. COS said it was possible
that Gottlieb used a euphemism, but it was more likely that he
mentioned either "President Eisenhower" or "the President." In
response to a question from the staff to paraphrase again the import
of Gottlieb's instruction to him, COS said that Gottlieb told him
something to the effect that "I am giving you instructions on highest
authority to assassinate Lumumba any way you can." COS said that
Gottlieb did not insist that the assassination had to take place by
means of the biological agents he was supplying.
COS said that this was not an exploration of the possibility
of assassination or the establishment of a mere capability for assassi-
nation. "They were serious about it it was clear that the
policy decision to assassinate Lumumba had been made." COS said
NW 50955 DoeId: 32423566 Page 6.
-4-
he was not awaiting any further "go signal" in order to proceed
with the assassination operation.
COS said that Gottlieb told him that there was to be no connec-
tion with the United States if the biological agents were to be
employed. COS had an asset in the Congo that he considered for
use as an intermediary in this project, although he never moved
forward to make the asset knowledgeable of the project. COS said
that, whether or not he used an intermediary to accomplish the
assassination, Gottlieb made it clear that "I was to do it or find
a way to do it."
COS asked Gottlieb when the lethal biological agents would
lose their potency. Gottlieb said this would happen over a long
period of time. COS said that he did not remember exactly what
the substances looked like, nor whether Gottlieb brought it in his
bag, and this would not be surprising because "in those days there
were no customs checks in the Congo."
COS locked the virus in a safe at the Station to which only
he had access. He remembers taking the virus from the safe sometime
later probably after the arrest or death of Lumumba to dispose
of it by burying it near the Congo River. COS said that he had no
training in chemistry and felt ill-equipped to deal with poisons.
COS asked Gottlieb if the poison left traces. Gottlieb told him
that it left the traces of a normal disease.
COS said he was never subjected to great pressure to use the
poison. COS added that, when he spoke with Gottlieb, "I don't
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 7
-5-
think I agreed to use it." Although he also said that he did not
tell Gottlieb that he would refuse to use it.
COS said that even though Gottlieb had told him that clearance
for the assassination of Lumumba had come from the President and
the DCI, he wanted verification from Headquarters of an assignment
of such magnitude. COS said: "I responded to Headquarters with a
double-talk message, saying that I had met the messenger and re-
questing confirmation. I then received a cable containing double-
talk confirmation, something like 'your assumption confirmed.'"
COS said "I never knew who was sending me these cables. They
also said 'Director' and I sent my cables with a special slug. My
cables were probably marked to 'Director" which is never actually
seen by the DCI. COS thought that he destroyed his copy of cables
on this subject on instructions contained in those cables. He said
that only a single copy of the cables had existed at the Congo
Station. COS said that he was instructed by Gottlieb that he was
not to discuss this assassination mission even with his own deputy.
COS said that he did not discuss the operation with Glenn Fields.
He also said that he would not have discussed the operation with
Dr. Lester Houck because Houck was removed as Branch Chief in early
fall due to dissatisfaction with his performance.
COS said that he thought an assassination effort was "a bad
idea, both morally and practically." However, COS said that he
may not have expressed his grave concern to Gottlieb because he was
so taken aback at receiving the assignment. COS thought that he
told Gottlieb that he did not have a good means of access to Lumumba.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 8
-6-
COS recalls raising the subject of assassination with
Gottlieb on subsequent occasions outside the Congo only in the
context of his (COS's) feeling: "Thank God I never had to use it."
COS did not remember if Gottlieb mentioned Richard Bissell as
a source of authority or approval for the assassination operation.
COS does not recall that anyone other than the President and the
DCI were indicated as the source of authority for the assassination
operation.
O'DONNELL IS DISPATCHED FROM HEADQUARTERS TO THE CONGO
COS recalled the fact that Justin O'Donnell arrived in the
Congo from CIA Headquarters approximately in October of 1960. COS
said that O'Donnell "came to eliminate Lumumba." COS did not re-
call whether O'Donnell recalled a conversation with Richard Bissell.
COS said that, in anticipating O'Donnell's arrival, he had
the impression that O'Donnell was coming to aid in the removal of
Lumumba. COS said, "I wondered if Headquarters thought I was drag-
ging my feet and that I might be relieved."
COS said he did not remember discussing his meeting with
Sidney Gottlieb with O'Donnell but he simply does not have a
specific recollection. COS said he would not dispute O'Donnell's
testimony that COS had made O'Donnell aware that a poison virus
was in his safe. COS said that assassination was "not excluded"
as one of the means of removing Lumumba that O'Donnell might use.
But COS said that he was not certain that assassination was included
as one of O'Donnell's tools. COS said that he may have discussed
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 9
-7-
with O'Donnell a plan to snatch Lumumba from "protective custody."
But he does not specifically remember this.
COS said that "O'Donnell did not seem to do anything most of
the time, and I didn't take him very seriously. He spent a lot of
time drinking." COS said that he was not aware of any action
O'Donnell took to carry out an assassination or a "snatch" of
Lumumba.
COS said that the assassination plan had struck him from the
beginning as a bad idea, so he moved slowly on it. "I showed some
action to Headquarters by sending cables, but never pushed it."
COS said that he asked O'Donnell to clear with him any major
actions he was contemplating in the Congo. COS believes that
O'Donnell was in the Congo from September until approximately
Christmas.
LUMUMBA's ESCAPE
COS said that Lumumba's escape from "protective custody" was
a surprise to him. He said that the CIA Station had nothing to do
with it, although they investigated the incident.
COS said "I was in touch with many official Congolese about
where Lumumba was and how he got out. But I did not get much good
information. It was assumed that Lumumba was going to Stanleyville.
The Congolese flew troops to points that he would have to pass on
this route. I remember reviewing maps of these routes with the
Congolese."
COS added, "I left the Congo for Rome because of the prospect
that Lumumba might start an uprising against 'white devils.' But
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 10
-8-
when I arrived in Rome I read that Lumumba was captured. I learned
from Mobutu and Casavubu that Lumumba would be imprisoned in Thys-
ville.
COS MEETS WITH BISSELL, TWEEDY, AND KARAMESSINES IN ROME
In November 1960, while Lumumba was at large, COS flew to Rome
to meet with Richard Bissell, Bronson Tweedy and Thomas Karamessines
(then Chief of Station in Rome) for a briefing session on events
in the Congo. The meeting took place at Karamessines' house. COS
remembers a general discussion of events surrounding Lumumba's
escape and of the situation in the Congo, but he does not recall
any specific discussion of assassination. He said, "Perhaps we
did discuss assassination, I simply don't recall. I was tired. I
had flown all day. And I wasn't in favor of assassination."
BRONSON TWEEDY
COS assumed that Tweedy was knowledgeable of the assassination
plan. However, he does not recall specifically discussing the plan
with Tweedy prior to the delivery of the poison or while he was in
possession of the poison. COS said, "I did talk with Bronson
Tweedy much later about it to the effect that 'thank God nothing
was ever done.'"
COS did not remember whether Tweedy came to the Congo before
Lumumba's death. COS thought that he must have come later. COS
said, however, that if Tweedy had come earlier he probably would
have asked Tweedy about the assassination mission.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 11
-9-
COS INFORMS DCI SCHLESINGER OF ASSASSINATION PLAN
COS said that in response to Schlesinger's request for reports
on "questionable activities" within the Agency, COS met with him.
COS said that he informed Schlesinger verbally that he had received
instructions to try to assassinate Lumumba. COS said that he did
not mention a poison virus to Schlesinger. COS said that Schlesinger
did not make a response to this information. COS was unaware of
any follow-up that was taken due to his briefing of Schlesinger.
OTHERS KNOWLEDGEABLE OF THE ASSASSINATION PLAN
COS said that he assumed that TWEEDY, BISSELL, and DULLES were
witting of the assassination plan. COS said that he did have
occasion to see ALLEN DULLES from time to time, but he does not
remember discussing assassination in any form with DULLES.
COS said, "I might have mentioned the assassination plan to
COLBY when he became Director." However, COS does not have any
specific recollection of a conversation with COLBY.
COS does not think he informed RICHARD HELMS of the assassina-
tion plan.
COS said that he was never interviewed by the INSPECTOR GENERAL
in 1967 in the preparation of the IG Report on Assassinations.
COS said that he never discussed the assassination plan with
ARNOLD SILVER.
PROJECT ZRRIFLE AND AGENT QJWIN
COS said he never discussed the assassination plan with William
Harvey (the Director of Project ZRRIFLE). COS said he never discussed
assassination capabilities or assets with Harvey.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 12
-10-
COS did not recall agent QJWIN. He did recall that O'Donnell
may have brought an asset into the Congo to help him. He said,
however, that based on our representation that QJWIN was in the
Congo in the fall of 1960, he must have known of QJWIN's activities.
WIROGUE
COS does not remember the true name of agent WIROGUE nor why
or how he came to the Congo. When his recollection was refreshed
by seeing cable traffic, COS said that WIROGUE was a difficult man
to handle. For a short time, WIROGUE became a major in the Congolese
Army. COS said that he had wanted ROGUE to pull together a sur-
veillance team. COS did not recall discussing WIROGUE with O'Donnell.
COS's only specific recollection is of being in WIROGUE's
apartment and discussing an assassination squad. COS does not
think that he mentioned the use of QJWIN in connection with this
"execution squad." COS said that it was conceivable that he had
approached WIROGUE with the idea of using him against Lumumba.
But COS remembers he came to mistrust WIROGUE and felt that WIROGUE
did not know what he was doing. COS also said it was unlikely
that he would have sent the cable about WIROGUE's approach to
QJWIN in ordinary CIA channels as he did if he thought this related
to the actual assassination mission. Instead, it was merely
evidence that WIROGUE was out of control.
MOVING LUMUMBA TO KATANGA
COS recalled that troops in Thysville mutinied while Lumumba
was being held there. COS was in contact with various Congolese
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 13
-11-
officials and discovered that Casavubu and Mobutu had decided to
fly to Thysville to put down the munity. COS attempted to con-
vince them not to go together. They did succeed in putting down
the mutiny.
COS did not learn that Lumumba was to be moved to Katanga
until after it happened. COS said his discussions with Mobutu
about Mobutu's intentions for Lumumba left COS with the impression
that Lumumba might be executed.
COS said that Jack Hasey was the Acting Base Chief in
Elizabethville, and was succeeded by David Whipple, who became
Base Chief in Katanga. COS also said that Ambassador Clare H.
Timberlake worked closely with COS, but they never discussed with
him the general question of assassination.
TESTIMONY UNDER ALIAS
At the outset of the interview, the Committee staff agreed
to honor COS's request to testify under alias. COS, who is still
in private enterprise in Zaire, said he would be in personal
danger there if he were linked to this story. He said, "They
might make me take the big high jump. I've been on the 'zap list'
before."
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 14
AFFIDAVIT
Dillon
INVENTORIED,
ON
3/31/77
BC
BY
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA SS:
I, C. Douglas Dillon, being first duly sworn, do upon oath
depose and state:
From June 1959 until early January 1961, I served as Under
Secretary of State. During approximately 35-40 percent of
that time, I served as Acting Secretary of State because of
Secretary Herter's absence from Washington.
Secretary Herter, who preceded me as Under Secretary of State,
had served as the State Department representative on the 54/12
Committee, a predecessor of the present Forty Committee. When
I became Under Secretary, the President asked me to retain my
earlier responsibilities for foreign economic policy. Accord-
ingly, the Number 3 position in the Department of State was
designated as Under Secretary for Political Affairs. Robert
Murphy was appointed to this position and took over the State
Department's responsibilities on the 54/12 Committee.
Because of the frequency of my service as Acting Secretary of
State, I was kept regularly informed of important 54/12 Com-
mittee decisions.
On occasion I met with the 54/12 Committee
and participated in its deliberations.
During this entire period I have no recollection of any dis-
cussions or decisions looking toward the assassination of
either Generalissimo Trujillo or Prime Minister Castro.
On one occasion in late July or early August of 1960, shortly
after Patrice Lumumba's visit to Washington, I attended a meet-
ing in the Pentagon at which the overall Congo problem was dis-
cussed. During the discussion, which covered a great variety
of matters, my recollection is that a question regarding the
possibility of an assassination attempt against Lumumba was
briefly raised. The CIA representative indicated that the Agency
did not undertake this sort of operation. This ended considera-
tion of this subject. With this one exception I never heard any
discussion of assassination attempts against anyone.
Dated this 21 day of May, 1975.
C. Douglas Dillon
Subscribed and sworn to before me
this day of May 1975
Notary Public
District of Columbia
NW 50955 DocId:32423566 Page 15
MEMORANDUM
TO: William G. Miller
Fritz Schwarz
Curt Smother's
Bill Bader
Burt Wides
Rhett Dawson
FROM: Frederick Baron
RE: Douglas Dillon Interview
DATE: August 28, 1975
I spoke today by phone with Douglas Dillon, who was on vacation
in Maine, concerning a paragraph in an affidavit he supplied to the
Rockefeller Commission on May 21, 1975. The paragraph records Dillon's
recollection that
"On one occasion in late July or early August of 1960, shortly
after Patrice Lumumba's visit to Washington, I attended a meet-
ing in the Pentagon at which the overall Congo problem was dis-
cussed. During the discussion, which covered a great variety of
matters, my recollection is that a question regarding the possi-
bility of an assassination attempt against Lumumba was briefly
raised. The CIA representative indicated that the Agency did
not undertake this sort of operation. This ended consideration
of this subject. With this one exception I never heard any
discussion of assassination attempts against anyone."
I explored the subject of this meeting generally with Mr. Dillon on the
phone and set an appointment for him to review documents and testify on
Tuesday, September 2, at 3:00p.m. in Room G 308.
On the phone Dillon gave the following background information
on the meeting at the Pentagon:
1. This was not a small meeting; eight or ten people attended.
He did not think it was a meeting of a small body. He said it was
not a Special Group meeting or NSC meeting. But he was clear that
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 16
2
was a high-level meeting due to the participants...
2. He believes the participants included the Secretary of
Defense because Dillon's recollection is firm on the fact that
the meeting took place in the office of the Secretary of Defense.
He did not remember whether Allen Dulles attended the meeting,
but he said "top CIA people were present". Dillon said Richard
Bissell was probably present. Dillon does not recall a man named
Robert Johnson, nor does he recall whether such a man was present at
the meeting, but he said that we might be able to refresh his
recollection by giving him more background on Robert Johnson.
(I did not mention on the phone the nature of Robert Johnson's
testimony before the Committee; I simply asked if Johnson was
present at the meeting.)
3. The mention of the subject of assassinating Lumumba was
within the general context, Dillon said, of Lumumba's visit to
the United States, which had "convinced us that Lumumba was
psychopathic, not in a well-balanced mental state. After his
visit we wondered whether there was any way of changing the scenery
of the Congo." Dillon said the subject was raised in the general
context of "eliminating Lumumba", but the discussion did not
proceed as far as mentioning means to be used.
4. Dillon said that the response of the "CIA representative"
was not necessarily a moral objection to assassination but was
made in the sense of indicating that the CIA did not have that
capacity".
Dillon did not recall who the CIA representative was who
made the remark.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 17
September 23, 1975.
Dear Mr. Dawson:
I enclose herewith Mr. Dillon's signed and notarized
affidavit.
Sincerely yours,
Dorothy de Borchgrave
Mr. Rhett Dawson
Senate Select Committee
Room G-308
New Senate Office Building.
Washington, D. C. 20510
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 18
State of New York
County of New York
SS:
C. Douglas Dillon, being duly sworn, deposes and
says: I have read the attached statement consisting of
two pages prepared by Rhett Dawson, Counsel to the Senate
Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations With Respect
to Intelligence Activities, based upon my conversation with
him on September 15, 1975, and I hereby adopt and ratify
this statement which is true and correct to my direct knowledge.
C. Douglas Dillon
Sworn to before me this 13th
day of September, 1975.
Cecilia A. Verdon
Notary Public
CECILIA A. VERDON
Notary Public, State of New York
No. 31-4095135
Qualified in New York County
Commission Expires March 30, 1977
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 19
STATEMENTS BY C. DOUGLAS DILLON
TO RHETT DAWSON ON SEPTEMBER 15, 1975
I, C. Douglas Dillon, do wish to make the following
statement.
1. On September 15, 1975 I was shown by Rhett Dawson,
Counsel, Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations
With Respect to Intelligence Activities, what he represented to
me to be documents of the National Security Council of the below
dates:
Exhibit 1. Minutes of the 451st Meeting
of the
National Security Council
held in the Cabinet Room of The White House
on Friday, July 5, 1960, 9:00-11:00 a.m.
(Approved by the President on July 19, 1960).
Exhibit 2. Memorandum of Discussion at the 452nd Meeting
of the National Security Council,
Thursday, July 21, 1960.
Exhibit 3. Memorandum of Discussion at the 456th Meeting
of the National Security Council,
Thursday, August 18, 1960
Exhibit 4. Minutes of the 458th Meeting
of the
National Security Council
held in the Cabinet Room of The White House
on Thursday, August 18, 1960, 9:00-11:00 a.m.
(Approved by the President on August 24, 1960)
Exhibit 5. Minutes of the 458th Meeting
of the
National Security Council
held in the Cabinet Room of The White House
on Wednesday, September 7, 1960, 2:30-4:30 p.m.
(Approved by the President on September 13, 1960
Exhibit 6. Memorandum of Discussion at the 460th Meeting
of the National Security Council,
Wednesday, September 21, 1960
NW 50955ocId: 32423566 Page 20
-2-
2. The documents shown to me do not in any way refresh my
recollection beyond the statements contained therein as to events related to the
Congo in the summer and early fall of 1960. I still do not have an independent
recollection of any specific conversation regarding the assassination of Patrice
Lumumba other than that described in my affidavit to the Rockefeller Commission
and in my testimony before the Select Committee on September 2.
3. I was informed by Mr. Dawson that Mr. Robert Johnson has testified
that he recollected a statement by President Eisenhower at an NSC meeting which
he construed as being an order for the assassination of Lumumba. After seeing
the documents listed above I am of the opinion that it is most likely that the NSC
meeting of August 18, 1960 is the meeting referred to by Mr. Johnson. Although
the record shows that I was present at that meeting I have no personal recollection
of any such statement or order by the President.
4. I note that as to the Memorandum of Discussion at the 456th Meeting
of the National Security Council, Thursday, August 18, 1960 (reference C, above)
a page or pages immediately before the second page of the exhibit seem to be missing.
5. It is my understanding that the six exhibits noted above, will be
appended to this affidavit for filing by the Select Committee.
Prepared by me on this 23rd day of September, 1975.
Rhett Dawson,
Counsel
Senate Select Committee to Study
Government Operations With Respect to
Intelligence Activities
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 21
MEMORANDUM
To: The Files
From: Frederick D. Baron
Date: September 5, 1975
Re: Interview with James Douglas on Lumumba Assassination Case.
I spoke by phone today with James Douglas, who was
Deputy Secretary of Defense in the Eisenhower Administration
from early December 1959 until January 21, 1961.
Mr. Douglas served under DOD Secretary Thomas Gates.
I interviewed Mr. Douglas because of a reference to him
in Douglas Dillon's testimony (Dillon, p.19). Dillon said that
in a phone conversation with Gates about the Pentagon meeting
(at which Dillon said someone raised the question of assassi-
nating Lumumba) Gates named James Douglas as a person likely
to have attended such a meeting.
Never Heard Suggestion of Assassination
Mr. Douglas said that during his tenure in office, he
never heard a suggestion of the assassination of Lumumba raised
in his presence. "I never heard speculation that it was even
on anyone's mind," he said.
Pentagon Meeting
Mr. Douglas does not recall a meeting at the Pentagon
in the summer of 1960 (as recounted by Douglas Dillon) where
the question of assassinating Lumumba was raised. Mr. Douglas
says that it was possible that he attended such a meeting, but
he has no recollection of it.
Special Group Meetings
Mr. Douglas attended Special Group meetings with some
regularity. Frequently, however, these meetings were attended
by Mr. Irwin, who was Assistant Secretary of Defense for Inter-
national Security Affairs during that period. Douglas said
that Irwin was "more actively in contact with the State Depart-
ment and the CIA during this time." (Irwin is now practicing
law in New York.)
Mr. Douglas said that the question of assassination of
Lumumba was not raised in his presence at a Special Group meeting.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 22
Memo to Files
September 5, 1975
Page Two
I read to him a quote from the Special Gropp minutes of
September 8, 1960. Douglas was in attendance at this
meeting. Mr. Gordon Gray was quoted as saying that he hoped
that CIA people were "fully aware of the top-level feeling
in Washington that vigorous action would not be amiss."
Douglas had no independent recollection of this remark or the
discussion to which it related.
Note:
I indicated to Mr. Douglas that it probably would not
be necessary to call him to testify on the Lumumba matter.
Mr. Douglas' phone numbers are: (617) 693-1353 (until September
29) and (312) 726-2452 (office in Chicago).
Rhett Dawson
cc:
Burt Wides
Fritz Schwarz
Curt Smothers
FDB/dsm
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 23
MEMORANDUM
To: The Files
From: Frederick D. Baron
Date: September 5, 1975
Re: Interview with James Douglas on Lumumba Assassination Case.
I spoke by phone today with James Douglas, who was
Deputy Secretary of Defense in the Eisenhower Administration
from early December 1959 until January 21, 1961.
Mr. Douglas served under DOD Secretary Thomas Gates.
I interviewed Mr. Douglas because of a reference to him
in Douglas Dillon's testimony (Dillon, p.19). Dillon said that
in a phone conversation with Gates about the Pentagon meeting
(at which Dillon said someone raised the question of assassi-
nating Lumumba) Gates named James Douglas as a person likely
to have attended such a meeting.
Never Heard Suggestion of Assassination
Mr. Douglas said that during his tenure in office, he
never heard a suggestion of the assassination of Lumumba raised
in his presence. "I never heard speculation that it was even
on anyone's mind," he said.
Pentagon Meeting
Mr. Douglas does not recall a meeting at the Pentagon
in the summer of 1960 (as recounted by Douglas Dillon) where
the question of assassinating Lumumba was raised. Mr. Douglas
says that it was possible that he attended such a meeting, but
he has no recollection of it.
Special Group Meetings
Mr. Douglas attended Special Group meetings with some
regularity. Frequently, however, these meetings were attended
by Mr. Irwin, who was Assistant Secretary of Defense for Inter-
national Security Affairs during that period. Douglas said
that Irwin was "more actively in contact with the State Depart-
ment and the CIA during this time." (Irwin is now practicing
law in New York.)
Mr. Douglas said that the question of assassination of
Lumumba was not raised in his presence at a Special Group meeting.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423566 Page 24
Memo to Files
September 5, 1975
Page Two
I read to him a quote from the Special Gropp minutes of
September 8, 1960. Douglas was in attendance at this
meeting. Mr. Gordon Gray was quoted as saying that he hoped
that CIA people were "fully aware of the top-level feeling
in Washington that vigorous action would not be amiss."
Douglas had no independent recollection of this