157-10014-10117
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10117
RECORD SERIES : MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-23
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE: RICHARD GOODWIN BINDER
DATE: 00/00/1975
PAGES: 103
SUBJECTS: ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: 1B; IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 03/21/2000
OPENING CRITERIA : CCBOX 453
COMMENTS:
J
v9.1
1
NW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 1
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10117
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-23
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
TO :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TITLE: RICHARD GOODWIN BINDER
DATE: 00/00/75
PAGES: 103
SUBJECTS: ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CCBOX 453
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 2
RICHARD GOODWIN BINDER
GOODWIN TESTIMONY NOTEBOOK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A. 4/26/61 Summary on Richard Goodwin by DiGenova.
B. 5/2/61 Memo to Bundy re "Cuba Problem" from Goodwin.
C. 5/4/61 Memo to Goodwin re "Possible Covert Activities against
Cuba," from Bissell.
D. 5/5/61 Draft of NSC Action No. 2413.
E. 5/5/61 Draft Record of Actions, 483rd NSC meeting (5/5/61)...
F. 5/24/61 Memorandum of Conversation with Dick Bissell, Tracy
Barnes, by Goodwin.
G. 6/10/61 Memorandum for the President re "CIA Reorganization,"
from Schlesinger.
H. 7/8/61 Memorandum for Mr. Richard Goodwin re "Cuban Covert
Plan," from Schlesinger.
I. 9/1/61 Memorandum to the President re Cuban Task Force
Meeting, 8/31, from Goodwin.
J. 11/1/61 Memorandum to the President, 'Eyes Only for the
President," re concept of a "command operation" for
Cuba, from Goodwin.
K. 11/2/61 Memorandum, Eyes Only for the President and the
Attorney General," re "operation should be organized
with five staff components," from Goodwin.
L. 11/4/61 Memo, "Eyes Only," re recommendations that "the Cuban
Operation be organized in five components."
M. 11/22/61 Memorandum to Sec. of State, Sec. of Defense, Director
of CIA, AG, Gen. Taylor, Gen. Lansdale, Richard Goodwin
re"...summary of the major decisions which have been
made in regard to the Cuba Operations" from Goodwin.
N. 8/10/62 Memorandum for Record re "Minutes of Meeting of Special
Group (Augmented) on Operation MONGOOSE, 10 August, 1962.
O. 8/13/62 Memorandum for William Harvey, CIA, Robert Hurwitch,
State, Gen. Benjamin Harris, Defense, Don Wilson, USIA
re "Alternate Course B," from Lansdale.
P. 8/14/62 Memorandum for Deputy Director (Plans) re "Operation
MONGOOSE," from Harvey.
Q. 5/27/75 Summary of Goodwin Interview w. Aaron re "Intelligence
Activities in Latin America."
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 4
Q. 6/10/75 Szulc Testimony before SSC, excerpt.
R. 7/17/75 Summary of documents produced by Goodwin on 7/16/75,
by Dennin.
S. 5/13/61 Memorandum to Goodwin re "CIA Covert Activities in
the Dominican Republic."
T. 5/29/61 Drafts and original of cable from State Dept. to
(date of cable) Dearborn.
NW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 5
July 17, 1975.
To: F.A.O. Schwarz/Curtis Smothers
From: Joseph E. DiGenova
Re: Richard Goodwin Materials and Summary
Summary
A. Goodwin Interview of July 16, 1975
Mr. Goodwin was interviewed for a second time
on July 16, 1975. He indicated that he chaired the "Cuba
Task Force" after the Bay of Pigs. Paul Nitze had pre-
viously chaired the group. It was this Cuba Task Force
that suggested the establishment of the Lansdale project.
In this regard, Goodwin noted that Lansdale proved to be
very efficient. Goodwin indicated that he was present
during the conversation between President Kennedy and Tad
Szulc concerning the question of assassinating Castro.
(See Szulc's testimony infra.) He spoke with the President
after that conversation and remembers JFK saying about
assassination: "We can't get into that we'll all be
targets." He noted that Bissell never mentioned anything
to him, Goodwin, about assassination attempts. With regard
to the August 10, 1962, meeting which he attended, Goodwin
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 6
2
noted that McCone never made any oration upon the immorality
of assassinating Castro. He remembered the August 10 meet-
ing and said that "assassination was not shot down". When
pressed for details at this point, and after being shown
the Lansdale (8/13/62) and Harvey (8/14/62) memoranda, he
said he wanted to think about the meeting before he made
any more statements about who said and did what. He noted,
however, that in 1966 while in Peru with Robert Kennedy that
Kennedy, in a fleeting retort to a series of questions
about U. S. assassination attempts against Castro, said
"Tell him (the interpreter) I saved his (Castro's) life."
At the conclusion of the interview he turned over
to the Committee various documents related to Cuba which he
had found in his personal papers. Those are appended to
this summary..
B. Goodwin Interview of May 27, 1975
During the course of this earlier interview,
Goodwin alluded to the Cuba Task Force. According to the
Committee notes of that interview, the discussion went as
follows:
In general, Goodwin had not heard much
specific talk of assassination, although
it would not have surprised him if it had
gone on. He mentioned one specific in-
stance in which he had heard talk of
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 7
3
assassinating Castro. After the Bay of
Pigs, a Cuba Task Force was established,
first chaired by Paul Nitze and then by
Goodwin in his capacity as White House
Staff Officer. At a meeting of the Task
Force, held at the State Department,
McNamara suggested "getting rid of Castro",
someone from the CIA, perhaps Bissell,
then asked if McNamara meant "Executive
Action". McNamara responded that he did
and stressed his interest in the idea.
However, Goodwin did not bring the topic
up later in the meeting after McNamara
left. (See interview infra.)
C. The Goodwin Documents
The documents which Mr. Goodwin has furnished
the Committee are of no startling significance. One docu-
ment, the May 2, 1961, memorandum from Bissell to Goodwin,
is noteworthy because it does not advise him of the Roselli
connection or the efforts to assassinate Castro. Bissell
notes, "I have not attempted to provide you with much
detail." A May 24, 1961, Memorandum of Conversation with
Bissell by Goodwin does not mention any reference by Bissell
to actions against Castro on the assassination front. An
Arthur Schlesinger memorandum of June 30, 1961, to the
President discusses the need for revamping of the "intelli-
gence set-up" of the United States. In a footnote in that
memorandum, Schlesinger notes that the CIA is not able to
control its operatives once they are in the field and of
the attendant dangers this poses. (See page 6 of the memo.)
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 8
4
The other documents indicate the thinking that went on up
to the point where the Lansdale group was established as
the coordinated effort against Cuba.
Areas of Inquiry for Goodwin
What, if anything, does Goodwin remember of the August
10, 1962, meeting of the Special Group which he attended?
Is this meeting different than the meeting he refers to
in his initial interview where McNamara broached the sub-
ject of assassinating Castro? Or has he simply confused
them and are they one and the same?
How does he explain McCone's recollection of having given
an oration on the immorality of assassinating Castro when
it was brought up at the August 10 meeting?
Was McNamara the person who brought up the subject at
that meeting?
What discussion, if any, followed?
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 9
MEMORANDUM
To: McGeorge Bundy
From: Dick Goodwin
SECRET
Draft
4/26/61
Here are a few scattered thoughts on the "Cube" problem.
Cuba is a threat to the security of the United States in two basic ways:
1. As a direct military messco in the Gwiblonn, a monaco which will
be intensifed as communist arms shipments continue.
However, oven this
increased danger will bo minimal. Cur treaty obligations cmmit us to tho
defense of any American nation which is attackod directly. Any military
moves by Castro could be immediately by our forces. Similarly we could
intervene in case of Castro military aid to guerilla operations in the Americas.
2. As an exporter of revolution: There is no doubt that Cuba is being
used as a base for export of the commurist-fidelista revolution. This is
done through the actual supply of funds and technical assistance to insurgent
elements, through widespread and reasonably effective propaganda apparatus
including a news service and radio network and through the use of Cuba as an
example of the alliance between fidciicmo and necessary social reform--
identification with weifare of the people.
This throat is significant -- especially in the Carribean area. However,
even here, in the last six months there has been a significant declino in Cuban
effectiveness. This has come because of the growing isolation of communist--
fiedlista elements from the Democratic left as Castro's pro-Soviet bent has
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 10
GEORET
-2-
become more apparent; and as Castro kas become increasingly erratic in
kis personal behavior. There are signs, in fact, that, the communists are
looking for another, more stable, horo - perhaps Cardenas of Mexico.
3. While this means a declining influence of fidelismo over popular
movements; it does not necessarily lessen the importance of Cuban Soviet-
Chinese material and technical aid to revolutionary movements. It is im-
portant to remember tlint even if Castro were wiped cut tomorrow we would
not have solved the problem of communist influence in the Amicas. In fact,
most of the greatest danger spots (F.G. Northeast Erasil, Columbia back-
country, communist dominated student movements, etc.) do not owe either
their existence or strength to Castro, but to local and independent leadership.
This danger has been steadily growing, and would contime to grow if our only
anti-communist move wore to Imock out Gestro. These movements will
Emefit from material assistance, oven if they do not look to Cuba for leadership.
Surrected Course of Actios:
Action Aimed At Cuba Directly
1. Before acting directly against Castro, in any fashion, we need a
completo reassessment of the vulnerability of his regime -- the degree of
popular support, the probably declining position of the Cuban economy and
its impact on the Cujan people, tho efficiency of his police state, the possi-
bilities of underground organization, etc. Without such cu accessment it is
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 11
SECRET
-2-
impossible to realistically determine what alternative courses of action cro
open to us.
2. To meet the military threat we can work out defense agreements
with Central American nations along the lines suggested with Professor Dorle.
3. We should approach the government of Chile to coil an Inter-American
arms limitation conference. This conference should deal with methods of
stopping external arms shipments in the content of the over-all limitations
which are desparately needed in Latin America. We should decide, before
this meeting, whether the risks in an QAS blockade of arms shipments to Cuba
are outweighed by the dangers involved in halting and searching international
shipping.
4. Immediately consult with heads of major nations in Latin America
to see how far they are willing to go in terms of collective action. This chould
be done via a porsonal emissery. Although we should have a reasonably clear
idea of what we want to do, this should be a genuine consultation among allies.
All the myriad proposals for OAS action, etc., depend on the reaction of other
Latin nations -- a roaction as yot undetermined.
5. Underlying all these proposals is the feeling that we should not move
quickly in direct action against Cuba. I do not believe that there is any course
of direct action which we can wisely take on the basis of current knowledge and
conditions.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 12
SECRET
-5-
Attempts to ston direct exmost of Contrciem
1. We should provide Carribean nations with the technical help
(e.g. radar to spot incoming planes) and navy patrol assistance to meet the
dangers of arms shipments from Cuba to insurgent elements in those nations.
2. There are two or three read danger spots (3.g. Dominican Republic
and Haiti) where we should now be developing domocratic alternatives to the
present regime -- organizing replacement governments. if we do not do this
then the inevitable changes in government may be followed by Castro-type
regimes. When Democratic alternatives are organised we should consider
means of precipitating the fall of Trujillo and Duvalier and possibly Somoza.
In this way we can exert marinum control over the type of replacement govern-
ment -- the timing and initiative should be ours.
3. Help provide counter-prop: galda assistance to Latin governments
-- e.g. račio transmitters. The more we can work through Democratic-
liberal forces in Latin America, rather than through Usul alone, the morc
effective will be our propaganda.
Ceneral countez-communist onezotions
Our long-range strategy in the Americas should have two basic clements:
First, the organization of a strong political counter-force. We have
a ready instrument in the newly organized League of Democratic parties.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 13
SECRET
-5-
We should assist these parties -- financially and technically -- to develop
protgressive political movements (in some cases revolutionary movements,
especially in the less progressive countries) through helping them in tech-
niques of organization down to the village level, ideological warfare, etc.
U. S. government help should be covert.
Second, the Alianza para el progreso. This program with its emphasis
on social and economic advance is the real hope of preventing a communist
takeover. The Alianza is proceeding cbout as rapidly as possible given present
organization of effort, and the magnitade of available funds. Eoth of these
elements are unsatisfactory.
A. Fundo: Prosent plans provide for the allocation of 250-350 million
dollars worth of economic assistance to Latin America in fiscal 1962. Thia
is cut of a total of 2.4 billion. (This sum does not include the social develop-
mont fund). Che hundred million of thừa willgtoto Drazil to get them over
their current financial crisis. I am not clear that any substantial allocation
could be made given the enormous needs in Asia (ospecially in India and
Pakistan) -- although I believe there can be some increase. However, theas
funds are probably not Sufficient to make a real and effective start in economic
development.
D. Organization: If communist tuhoover comes in Latin America it
probably will not come through guerilla warfare, but through the capture off
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 14
SECRET
6
indigenous revolutionary movements. We cannot meet such a Great
effectively -- well-organised as it is -- when our overseas operations are
as Ciffuse and uncoordinated as they are today. The aid programı, the
political buroans of State, the USLA, educational emchunge, CLA activitics
all go, to too great an extent, their own way under separate heads and often
in pursuit of separate goals. I believe that resulting diffusion of offort,
results in great waste of resources ami intelligence. We must organize our
non-military overseas operation to reflect our basic objective in Latin
America -- the strengthening of democratic Westera-oriented nations and
governments so that they have the capacity to resist comamunist attack in all
its forms. Those who are charged with the responsiblity for achieving this
objective must love control over the instruments which our government
provides. Just as we have seen the need for somo centralisation of command
This
in fighting hot wors -- it in noodedor offectively waging a cold war.
does not necessally mean a "Chief of Hemisphere Operations"; but of the
very least it means that, within each key country there must be a contral op-
erational capacity and authority dith direct lines to the levels of action in
Washington.
NW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 15
SECRET
EYES CILY
2 May 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Richard N. Goodwin
Assistant Special Counsel to the
President
SUBJECT: Possible Covert Activities against Cuba
Attached is a brief statement regarding covert operations
against Cuba. In view of your familiarity with this subject
and our conversations over the past few days, I have not
attempted to provide you with much detail.
Richard M. Bissell, Jr.
Deputy Director
(Plans)
Attachment: Paper as stated above
NW 50955 Docid: 32423505 Page 16
EVES CRY
2 May 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Richard N. Goodwin
Assistant Special Counsel to the
President
SUBJECT: Possible Covert Activities against Cuba
Attached is a brief statement regarding covert operations
against Cuba. In view of your familiarity with this subject
and our conversations over the past few days, I have not
attempted to provide you with much detail.
Richard M. Bissell, Jr.
Deputy Director
(Plans)
Attachment: Paper as stated above
NW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 17
STOLLEN
2 May 1961
As indicated by the combined INR/ONE estimate, anti-Castro
activity within Cuba will probably be muted at least for the next
several months. Most individuals whose loyalty is in any way
suspect have been arrested. A recent report from the Swiss
Ambassador indicated that political prisoners now number 100,000.
All internal services will continue to work on a theory of repression
plus undoubtedly swift and brutal penalties. Consequently, it will be
very difficult to carry on any clandestine operations and it is doubtful
that such operations can have any significant impact in weakening
the Castro regime.
In spite of this, evidence is still available that there is opposition
to the regime among individuals still at large and that such opposition
is prepared to undertake action despite the risks involved. Moreover,
there are still agents distributed through most of the six provinces
and communications can still be had either directly or indirectly with
these individuals. At the very least these agents can and will continue
to collect information and to transmit it to the Agency. In addition,
certain of these individuals, plus some additional ones who might be
infiltrated, could attempt to carry out some sabotage. Individual
acts of sabotage are possible with relatively few men and small
amounts of material. Successive acts of sabotage or extensive
SEOPAT
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 18
sabotage operations are more difficult and inevitably more costly in
terms of loss of men. Nevertheless, it would be possible, starting
in the near future, to attempt limited sabotage with a view to determining
its feasibility and with the hope that gradually an increased program
might be developed.
A capability also exists for types of maritime operations including
infiltration and exfiltration of individuals, landing and caching of arms,
under-water sabotage of shipping and small raider operations. Under
present circumstances it would seem wrong to atteinpt these except on
a very limited scale and, in all likelihood, raider operations should not
be attempted until more information regarding feasibility has been
obtained,
The Agency also has a small air arm including some transport
aircraft (C-54 and C-46 types) plus attack bomber aircraft (B-26).
Although it is not absolutely certain, there is reason to suppose that
Cuban crews also are available for operational flights. At the moment,
air operations should be substantially eliminated with the possible
exception of supply flights to support opposition elements unable to
survive without such support. Even with respect to such operations,
however, it should be remembered that the percentage of successful
night drops is extremely limited so that the urgency should be great
to justify the risk. B-26 strikes could, of course, be flown against
chosen targets (e.g. refineries, power plants, tire plants) and, if
NW56558
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 19
successful, might have the effect of extensive sabotage. In view
of the risks involved, however, and the poor deniability of U.S.
support where aircraft are involved, it is recommended that such
operations be avoided at least for the present.
Manolo Ray of the MRP has asserted an independent MRP
capability to conduct infiltration, intelligence collection, sabotage
and defection operations into Cuba. He recognizes a need for U.S.
support but is very firm in his desire to operate as independently
as possible of any official U.S. connection. His initial request
is for five boats, some materiel and some money. He admits,
however, that, looking ahead, additional support such as real
estate, some help with training and communications will be required.
He offers to share his information with the U.S. Government, seek
U.S. advice and, at least for a period of time, be willing to operate
with the Revolutionary Council. The Council's views are being
canvassed and Ray has been asked to prepare a prospectus giving
in some detail his needs for U.S. support for the immediate future
and the step-up required over a period of time should his efforts
prove successful.
The Ray proposal should certainly be examined and given support
within reasonable limits if the relationships proposed both with the
Council and with the U.S. are satisfactory.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 20
SECRET
In addition to the activities described above, propaganda
activities such as radio broadcasts and publication of magazines
and newspapers can be continued independently by the Agency or
in support of Ray or the Revolutionary Council. Moreover, limited
political action operations are possible. As to both propaganda
and political action, however, the amount of effort and the type
of activity undertaken will depend to a large extent on the decisions
with respect to the operations described above. Consequently,
these will be noted here as mere possibilities.
NW 50865 Doeld; 32421505 P
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 21
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
3. U.S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA
(NSC Action No. 2413-c; Nemo for NSC, same subject, dated May 4, 1961)
2. Agreed that the political objective of U. 8. policy to-
ward Caba is to bring about the downfall of the Cestro
regime.
b. Agreed that the United States should not undertake mil-
itary intervention in Cuba now, but should do nothing
that would foreclose the possibility of military inter-
vention in the future.
c. Agreed that the Cuban situation should be kept under
constant review, in the light of the possibility that
actions by Castro would prozpt a reconsideration of
the decision not to intervene..
d. Agreed that the United States should not impose a naval
or air blockade against Cuba at this time.
9. Noted the impertence the President attaches to obtain-
ing timely and adequate intelligence as to Cuban mili-
tary capabilities, especially the enhancement of such
capabilities by Sino-Soviet Bloc military assistance:
taking into account the possibility of U. S. inter-
vention at a future MEN date.
NW 50955 DocId:32423505 Page 22
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
f. Noted the importance the President attaches to publica-
tion in the Free World press of the terroristic actions
of the Castro regime.
4. Noted the President's direction that the Task Forca on
Cuba make a detailed study of possible weaknesses and
vulnerabilities in the elements which exert control in
Cuba today.
h. Noted that a Special Comittee, under the direction of
the Pirector of Central Intelligence, would prepare a
plan of special covert operations with respect to Cuba,
for the consideration of the President.
1. Agreed that no separate Cuban military force should be
organized in the United States, but that Cuban nationals
would be encouraged to enlist in the U. S. armed forces
and trained in spesial units courtsting of Spanish-
speaking natiemats, under a plan to be presented by
the Secretary of Defense in connection with his review
of U. S. conventional forces.
NW 50955 bocld 32423505 Page 23
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
1. Agreed that Cuban nationals nou in the United States
will be given refugee status and assisted, under a
program to be developed and directed by the Secretary
of Health, Education & Welfare, in carrying on their
former occupations. Refugees now in Miami will be
encouraged to locate in other areas. Cuban nationals
entering the United States will be given refugee status.
k. Agreed not to impose a complete trade embargo on Cuba
for the present, but if later actions by Castro resulted
in a decision to do so, all trade with Cuba would be
stopped. The Secretary of State agreed to send to the
President WHA an analysis of how a U. S. embargo on
trade with Cuba would affect our trade relations with
other countries under the Battle Act.
1. Noted that the President would discuss with Canada the
position of Canadian subsidiaries of U. S. corporations
in the event of U. S. impositions in trade embargoes
on Cuba.
9. Agreed that the United States should at once initiata
nagotiation to enlarge the willingness of other Ameri-
can states to join in bilateral, multilateral and CAS
arrangements to quarantine Castro, such as (1) breaking
diplomatic relations with Cuba (2) controlling
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 24
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
subversive activities of Cuban agents; (3) preventing
arms shipments to Castro; (4) limiting economic rela-
tions with Cube; (5) creating a Caribbean security
force; (6) initiating a naval patrol to prevent Cuben
invasion of other states in the Caribbean; and (7) dẹ
nunciation of Castro as an agent of international com-
muniem by HMH all nations of this homisphere.
n. Agreed that the Alliance For Progress should be
strengthened by such measures as (1) rapid implementa-
tion of selected social development projects; (2) ac-
celeration of the implementation of other Latin Amor
ican aid; and (3) provision of additional resources
for Latin American economic and social development,
including consideration of a supplemental appropria-
tion for development loans.
9. Agreed that the U. S. Information Agency would rather
expand its existing program in Latin America rather
than initiate electronic warfare against the Castro
regime.
2. Agreed that U. S. military officers, under genadal
guidance to ba prepared by the Department of State,
would discuss the Castro threat to all Latin America
with Latin American officers.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 25
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
iv. Agreed that the Secretary of State should prepare a
report on a possible new juridical basis for effec-
tive anti-communist action.
4. U. S. POLICY TOWARD THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC AND HAIΣΙ
Agreed that the Task Force on Cuba would prepare promptly
both emergency and long-range plans for anti-communist
intervention in the event of crises in Haiti or the
Dominican Republic. Noted the President's view that
the United States should not initiate the overthrow of
Trujillo before we knew what goverment would succeed
him, and that any action against Trujillo should be
multilateral..
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 26
DRAFT RECORD OF ACTIONS
483rd NSC Meeting
(5/5/61)
1. U. S, POLICY TOWARD IRAN
Agreed that a Task Force should be established under the Assistant
Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs to prepare and circulate
a report on the subject by May 15 for discussion by the Council on
May 19.
2. U. S. POLICY TOWARD KOREA
Agreed that a Task Force under the Assistant Secretary of State for
Far Eastern Affairs should be established to prepare and circulate
a report on the subject by May 15 for discussion by the Council on
May 19.
3. U. S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA
(NSC Action No. 2413-c; Memo for NSC, same subject, dated May 4, 1961)
a. Agreed that U. S. policy toward Cuba should aim at the downfall
of Castro, and that since the measures agreed below are not
likely to achieve this end, the matter should be reviewed at
intervals with a view to further action.
b. Agreed that the United States should not undertake military in-
tervention in Cuba now, but should do nothing that would fore-
close the possibility of military intervention in the future.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 27
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
3. Ur-S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued)
C. Agreed that the United States should not impose a naval blockade
or attempt an air war against Cuba; it was noted that neither
course had the support of the Department of Defense or the Joint
Chiefs of Staff.
d. Noted the importance the President attaches to obtaining timely
and adequate intelligence as to Cuban military capabilities, en-
pecially the enhancement of such capabilities by Sino-Soviet bloc
military assistance, so that U. S. capabilities for possible in-
tervention may be maintained at an adequate level.
e. Noted the importance the President attaches to publication in the
Free World press of the terroristic actions of the Castro regine,
and to possible political action to end the current terror.
f. Noted the President's direction that the Central Intelligence
Agency, with other departments, should make a detailed study of
possible weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the elements which
exert control in Cuba today.
$
8. Agreed that relations with the Revolutionary Council should be
improved and made more open, and while it cannot be recognized
as a government-in-exile, support should be given to it insofar
as it continues to represent substantial Cuban sentiment.
h. Agreed that no separate Cuban military force should be organized
in the United States, but that Cuban nationals would be encouraged
to enlist in the U. S. armed forces under plans to be developed
by the Secretary of Defense.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 28
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
3. U. S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued)
1. Agreed that Cuban nationals now holding U. S. visitors' visas
will be given refugee status and assisted, under a program to
be developed and directed by the Secretary of Health, Education
and Welfare, in carrying on their former occupations. Refugees
now in Miami will be encouraged to locate in other areas. Cuban
nationals entering the United States will be given refugee status.
All refugees will be eligible to apply for travel privileges, and
it was understood that they would also be eligible for citizen-
ship.
1. Agreed not to impose an immediate trade embargo on Cuba. The
Secretary of State agreed to send to the President an analysis
of the effects of a U. S. embargo on trade with Cuba in relation
to the Battle Act. It was agreed that when an embargo is im-
posed, it should be as complete as possible, with certain excep-
tions for Canada and with Red Cross distribution of drugs.
k. Agreed that the United States should at once initiate negotiation
to enlarge the willingness of other American states to join in
bilateral, multilateral and OAS arrangements against Castro,
such as (1) breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba; (2) control-
ling subversive activities of Cuban agents; (3) preventing arms
shipments to Castro; (4) limiting economic relations with Cuba;
(5) creating a Caribbean security force; (6) initiating a naval
patrol to prevent Cuban invasion of other states in the Carib-
bean; and (7) denunciation of Castro as an agent of international
communism by all nations of this hemisphere.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423505 Page 29
DRAFT
TOP SECRET
3. U, S. POLICY TOWARD CUBA (Continued)
1. Agreed that the Alliance For Progress should be strengthened by
such measures as (1) rapid implementation of selected social de-
velopment projects; (2) acceleration of the implementation of
other Latin American aid; and (3) provision of additional re-
sources for Latin American economic and social development, in-
cluding consideration of a supplemental appropriation for devel-
opment loans of the order of $200-$400 million.
m. Agreed that the U. S. Information Agency would expand its exist-
ing program in Latin America, but not initiate electronic warfare
against the Castro regime; means of propaganda should be made
available to non-U. S. groups.
n. Agreed that U. S. military officers, under general guidance to
be prepared by the Department of State, would discuss the Castro
threat to all Latin America with Latin American officers.
o. Agreed