157-10002-10150
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10002-10150
RECORDS SERIES :
TRANSCRIPT
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
ΤΟ :
TITLE :
TESTIMONY OF HOWARD J. OSBORN
DATE: 08/28/75
PAGES: 96
SUBJECTS:
CIA
GIANCANA, SAM
MAHEU, ROBERT
CASTRO
ROSELLI, JOHNNY
HARVEY, WILLIAM
PAPICH, SAM
GAMBINO
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : T
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/30/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
Box 255
Folder 8
COMMENTS:
NW 50955 DocId:32281990 Page 1
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
Date: 10/05/93..
Page:1
TOP SECRET
3
TESTIMONY OF HOWARD J. OSBORN, ACCOMPANIED
BY JOHN W. DEBELIUS, COUNSEL
Mr. Osborn. My name is Howard J. Osborn, 1224 Mottron
Drive, McLean, Virginia.
Mr. Wallach. And Counsel, would you just state your name.
Mr. Debelius. The name is John W. Debelius, 570 North
Frederick Avenue, Gaithersburg, Maryland.
Mr. Wallac h. Once again, Mr. Osborn, as the Senator told
you, and as you have been told before, you do have the full
spectrum of rights available to you here that you have under
the Constitution, and in particular you do have the right to
remain silent if you choose to as to any particular question.
And in addition, you have the right to request that a Senator
be present if you desire that one be here.
Mr. Osborn. Yes.
Mr. Wallach. Very briefly, before Mr. Rhea begins his
questions, I would like to ask if Mr. Debelius is here as your
personal counsel today?
Mr. Osborn. That is right.
Mr. Osborn. I take it, then that the CIA in no way secured
Mr. Debelius' representation for you?
Mr. Osborn. I wish they were paying him, but they are not.
I am.
Mr. Wallach. I will ask Mr. Rhea to begin his segment of
the examination.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 2
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
19
Mr. Osborn. Not to the best of my recollection.
Mr. Rhea. That is all I have. Thank you very much.
(Off the record discussion.)
Mr. Wallach. Mr. Osborn, if you would, just very briefly,
on the subject matter that I am going to be directing your
attention to, the mail programs, the various mail programs that
you may have had knowledge of while you were with the CIA, I
would like to have you very briefly trace your career for us
in briefest terms with the Agency.
Mr. Osborn. All right.
I jointed the Agency on 10 October 1974.
I worked in what was then known as the Office of Collection
and Dissemination, which concerned itself largely with the
collection of any information that had any foreign intelligence
import from other Government departments and agencies such as
the Department of Commerce, the Department of Interior, the
Department of the Treasury, and so forth. It was essentially
a liaison job.
I served there about a year and a half, and I then jointed
the Contact Division of the Office of Operations, which was
concerned with the selection of foreign intelligence information
from American businessmen and private organizations who had
business abroad.
I served there until roughly 1950, when I jointed the
Office of Special Operations, and was ansioned to create a hon
NW 50955 DocId:32281990 Page 3
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
20
This division, as I recall, was the Plans Staff of the
Foreign Intelligence Division of the Clandestine Services which
is known as the Deputy Director of Plans, DDP.
I was promoted from that position to be Chief of the Plans
Staff. I served there until 1955, roughly 1955, when I became
Assistant to the Inspector General of the Agency.
I served there until 19 -- correction. I think I joined
the Inspector General's staff in 1954, and I left there in late
1955 to go abroad in the position of Deputy Chief of Statio
for combined Services in a German station in Frankfurt
Germany.
After three years in that position I served brifely for
six months as Deputy Chief of Base in Berlin
And then 11 months as Chief of Basc in Munich, Germany.
I left there in September 1960 to take the position of
Deputy Chief of the Soviet Russian Division in the Clandestine
Services of the Agency in Washington. I served in that
position for about a year and a half, and then became Chief of
the Soviet Russian Division. And I held that position until
Septemb er of 1963, when I accepted the position of Deputy
Director of the Office of Security of the Agency.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 4
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
22
Mr. Osborn. To the best of my recollection, I believe they
were.
Mr. Wallach. Going back just a step, I take it that you
had no knowledge of any mail opening projects while you were
with the Inspector General's Office in 1954?
Mr. Osborn. To the best of my recollection, I don't
believe I was briefed on what was then HT LINGUAL and which
subsequently became SR POINTER
Mr. Wallach. I think those just may have been different
names for the same operation, different divisions.
Mr. Osborn. I think they were, yes, different code names.
They changed them frequently.
Mr. Wallach. While you were in Berlin -- you said nom
wore Station Chif
Deputy Chief of Base.
Mr. Wallach. Did you have knowledge of the military's
mail operation over there, mail intercept operation?
Mr. Osborn. I may have had, but I can't recall it spe-
cifically.
Mr. Wallach. Did you subsequently gain knowledge of that
mail intercept operation?
Mr. Osborn. I have heard of it somewhere.
Mr. Wallach. What is the nature of the operation that you
have heard of?
Mr. Osborn. That the military was intercepting mail.
I
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 5
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
23
don't know the details.
Mr. Wallach. Have you heard of any arrangements whereby
the German authorities actually provide the mail?
Mr. Osborn. I can't recall that, honestly. I may have,
but I can't recall it specifically.
Mr. Wallach. In other words, would it be fair to say that
you are not familiar with that operation?
Mr. Osborn. I am not familiar at all with it.
Mr. Wallach. As I stated before, we have some documents
here, and there are a couple that I think are relevant. And I
would like you to review them later, but I want to get your
state of recollection now. I realize that it is based on
memory of events years ago, and things you read in the paper.
And in no way am I questioning the truth of your memory.
Mr. Osborn. I understand.
Mr. Wallach. Could you just give us an overview
of your understanding as to how the we will call it the
New York intercept, SR. POINNER OF HT LINGUAL, whichever name
you want to use, developed in the fifties?
Mr. Osborn. I have no specific knowledge of this. It is
a little unusual, but even considering that this is one of the
things, of course, that we reported to Director Schlesinger,
I don't believe we reported this in any detail as to how it
started, because I am not really sure that any of us knew.
I don't recall exactly how it did start. But it was alsways
NW 50955 DocId:32281990 Page 6
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
30
which time I was briefed on this particular operation.
Mr. Wallach. Did you know whether or not the Postmaster
General, the then Postmaster General, I am not sure who it
was in 1964, July, whoever it was in that position, had
knowledge of the fact that mail was opened in New York City?
Mr. Osborn. To the best of my recollection, I never heard
that he was.
Mr. Wallach. Had you ever heard either way about the
Attorney General, be it Robert Kennedy or any of his
predecessors?
Mr. Osborn. Not to the best of my recollection.
Mr. Wallach. When you visited New York on this inspection
trip that you described being possibly with Mr. White, do you
recall whether or not Mr. Fabrini accompanied you out to the
facility?
Mr. Osborn. I can't recall specifically, but I am sure
that he did.
Mr. Wallach. Did you actually go out to nalewild, or
to Konnody, if it was changed?
They had changed it. It was then an adjuncat
Mr. Osborn.
Services of the Agency in Washington. I served in that
position for about a year and a half, and then became Chief of
the Soviet Russian Division. And I held that position until
Septemb er of 1963, when I accepted the position of Deputy
Director of the Office of Security of the Agency.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 7
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
40
Mr. Dick. Were you told that it was illegal?
Mr. Osborn. No. I assumed it was. You don't open mail
in peacetime.
Mr. Wallach. Did the Office of Security also run the
project in Washington whereby diplomatic pourchos were opened?
Mr. Osborn. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Wallach. Do you have any knowledge of the project?
Mr. Osborn. We had some arrangement with the Department
of Customs as Dulles Airport And it may have been diplomatic
ponches. I am not sure that it was, but we did have some
arrangements with Customs But I can't recall the details
of it. But I feel sure that we did.
Mr. Wallach. At nullos?
Mr. Osborn. The one I specifically remember was at Dulles.
And I am pretty sure it was diplomatic pouches. But I can't
recall the details, I really can't. But I have a recollection
of this. Ang again, we were doing it just as a mechanism
again. It was the Clendestine Services that had to be calling
the shot of that.
Mr. Wallach. I am just asking for the extent of your
knowledge.
Mr. Osborn. And if we did it at Dulles we must have done
it some other places.
Mr. Wallach. What cooperative arrangement with Customs
areyou aware of?
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 8 TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
41
Mr. Osborn. We had totally cooperative arrangement with
the Bureau of Custons.
Mr. Wallach. With respect to mail?
Mr. Osborn. Anything.
Mr. Wallach. Could you go into that?
Mr. Osborn. I can't recall the details, but I can recall
that we used to bring in highly sinsitive people through
Customs without Customs services.
Mr. Wallach. I am really just asking, not for techniques
or narcotics or training or things like that we are aware of,
but really with respect to Customs providing certain mail
Customs providing mail that the Postal Service could not
provide in certain situations.
Mr. Osborn. I have a recollection that they did cooperate
with us in this respect. And I am sorry that I can't be more
clear on the details.
Mr. Wallach. Was there a particular point of contact m
Customs?
Mr. Osborn. Yes.
Mr. Wallach. Who was that?
Mr. Osborn. The point of contact that we remember the
best was a fellow named Dave Ellis that I remember.
Mr. Wallach. And how late was Mr. Ellis there at Customs?
Mr. Osborn. He retired about two and a half years ago.
Mr. Dick. What was his position at Customs?
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 9
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
42
Mr. Osborn. He was a Deputy under Commissioner of Customs
He had a very high position in Customs David C. Ellis was
his name.
Mr. Wallach. I note your attorney is taking notes. May
I ask if those will be provided to the CIA?
Mr. Debelius. If they will be provided to the CIA it
wouldn't be by me, Mr. Wallach. Really, I am doing it here
to organize my own thoughts. And I would be happy to destroy
them in your presence.
Mr. Wallach. I have absolutely no problem. I was just
wondering if you were going under instructions.
Mr. Debelius. Could we go off the record just a moment?
Mr. Wallach. Surely.
(Off the record discussion.)
Mr. Wallach. Do you recall anybody else Customs that
the Agency had contact with on a regular basis?
Mr. Osborn. I can't recall any other, but I am sure there
were others.
Mr. Wallach. Do you recall any generic types of operations
that Customs cooperated with?
Mr. Osborn. No. But to the best of my recollection, there
was very little that we would ask Customs to do that they
Aouldn't do for us. The same is true of immigration and
Naturalization and many other departments.
Mr. Dick. Are you familiar with a series of Customs
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 10
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
43
operations that terminated in the mid-sixties that involved
interceptions off propaganda from other countries to the US?
Mr. Osborn. I seem to have heard of this, but I can't
recall it specifically. It sounds familiar to me.
Mr. Dick. Do you recall whether in any of those customs
programs the CIA might have received mail from Customs, access
to the mail?
Mr. Osborn. Not specifically. And I can clarify one
thing for you now. On this Dulles thing, I am sorry. It was
not diplomatic pouches It wasm to and from the Soviet
Union that we used to take and bring back and reproduce and
put back, and specifically Dulles And I seem to recall also
in the same context of my discussion with you if you ask
me specifically if I knew, I would say no, but I seem to
recall that they did cooperate with us in the matter of
diplomatic pouches... I can't remember a specific instance,
but I recall this.
Mr. Dick. Is that the extent of your recollection?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, really. But this propaganda thing
rings a loud bell in my mind.
Mr. Wallach. Aside from the mail opening projects which
have publically come to light in recent months and I will
go through them very briefly now there were the San ca
Francisco project, which was repeated two or three times, the
project in New Orleans which you have mentioned before in the
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 11
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
59
Communist China from San Francisco.
I said, does Mr. Karamessines approve this?
They said,yes.
I said, does Mr. Helms approve it -- and they
said, we can assume that Mr. Karamessines has got Mr. Helms'
approval.
And I said, I can't assume it. I will have to get it
from him directly.
And I did. I sent one of my fellows, a senior fellow
named Jack Turton. I made arrangements through Mr. Cottery
I believe, to send him out to San Francisco to talk to
the Chief Postal Inspector in San Francisco, and I believe
they set it up so that representatives of the Far East
Division and the Technical Services Division, not the security
people -- I can't recall, but I believe that they were to pose
as Postal Inspectors, with access of certain categories of
mail from Communist China to this country, for the purpose of
photographing exteriors, examining it for possible eviddnce
of censorship, but I did not know that they were going to open
it, I had no idea they opened the mail. And I found out
socially and personally from one of the people involved about
a year ago that they opened the mail.
Mr. Wallach. Who was that from?
Mr. Osborn. A friend ofmine whowas involved,
who is retired from the Agency, a fellow by the name of Rood
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 12
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
60
Mr. Wallach. Was Mr. Kenner actually involved in the
operation?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, he was a part of it.
Mr. Wallach. Do you know Mr. Nikashawa?
Mr. Osborn. I am sure there was one, but I never met
anybody named Mikashawa.
Mr. Wallach. Are you saying, Mr. Osborn, that the
operation you received approval from Mr. Helms for was not
a mail opening operation?
Mr. Osborn. That is right. It was a mail cover
operation.
Mr. Wallach. Would it be fair to say, then, that in
gaining that approval from you you were actually misled?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, indeed I wasn't misled, but per-
haps it seemed when I got out there and found out how easy
it was to get it -- but I don't know, I wasn't told that
they were to open mail. That isn't the circumstances
under which I briefed Mr. Helms.
Mr. Wallach. Did you discuss this project with Mr.
Cotter?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, I discussed it with him, I think, in
arranging the original meeting with Mr. Turton. I don't know
whether Mr. Turton went over and talked to Mr. Cotter directly,
or whether Mr. Cotter just made the entre with the San Francisco
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 13
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
63
In other words, I am sure they didn't go to Mr. Cotter
every time they wanted something on a day-to-day relationship.
Mr. Wallach. I have just given Mr. Osborn a copy of
a memorandum dated December 24, 1974, which is in fact after
the time he left on sick leave, and there is no reason to
believe that he was seen it. I would just like him to re-
view it and possibly refresh his recollection.
Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
Mr. WAllach. Back on the record.
I think I misspoke when I gave Mr. Osborn a memo. It
is a three-page undated memo captioned "Project West Pointer."
I believe it was recently prepared.
But in any event I would like to call your attention
to the last paragraph on the third page which states:
"The main difference between SRPOINTER and West Pointer
is that the file shows specific reference to a statement by
the Postal authorities that mail not to go out of Post Office
control. While mail was opened and photographed by Agency
personnel in New York City under SRPOINTER, and not specific
post office approval was given, neither is there written order
not to do so. In West Pointer the opening of mail was
contrary to specific orders that mail was not to out of post
office control."
Mr. Osborn. There you are.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 14
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
64
Mr. Wallach. Is that also your understanding, really?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, very definitely.. This fellow who is
a close friend of mine -- and I don't want to necessarily put
him on the spot, but he is retired and is in Florida --
came back and spent time with me at my home. And at one
juncture, discussing such things as now, the Senate and the
House, and what is going to happen, he said, well, you know,
you remember that West Coast operation.
And I said, yes.
And he said, you didn't know we opened the mail,
did you?
And I said, no, I didn't know you opened the mail.
That was the first time I ever heard they opened it.
Mr. Dick. Are you referring to Mr. Kamber?
Mr. Osborn. Yes.
Mr. Dick. What division was Mr. Kenner in?
Mr. Osborn. He was with ID at that time.
Mr. Wallach. I take it by your actions -- this might
be speculation, and if you don't want to answer, feel free
not to.
Mr. Osborn. If I do, I will establish that it is
speculation.
Mr. Wallach. You would not have approved the West
Coast operation if you knew it involved mail opening?
Mr. Osborn. I would not have approved it -- the
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 15
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
65
Director might have approved it, but it wasn't the way
I briefed it, and it wasn't my understanding with Mr. Cotter.
Mr. Wallach. In other words, you did give Mr. Cotter
assurance that this was only a mail cover type of operation?
Mr. Osborn. That was the understanding I had with Mr.
Cotter, to the best of my recollection.
Mr. Wallach. Have you subsequently discussed the
West Coast operation with Mr. Cotter?
Mr. Osborn. Yes, I have. Since I am under oath,
I had lunch with Bill Cotter and Marv Gentile on Tuesday of
this week, and we naturally discussed this stuff. We went
over the fact that he recalled me, and that both of us were
instrumental in terminating the New York project. And I have
forgotten the exact context, but the San Francisco thing
came up. And I told him, I didn't even know the mail was
being opened until I talked to Rod Kenne
He said, you didn't?
And I said, no.
He said, well, it was. He said, I just found out about
it. I presume through testimony or something.
But that was the essence of my discussion.
Mr. Wallach. Did Mr. Cotter talk to you about any
FBI mail opening projects?
Mr. Osborn. No, he did not. We were in a public res-
taurant. We doubletalked.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 16
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
84
you have any knowledge of it?
Mr. Osborn. The first time I ever saw the Huston Plan
was in the newspapers.
Mr. Wallach. Didn't Mr. Helms know that mail was being
opened in New York in 1971?
Mr. Osborn. Of course he did.
Mr. Wallach. Did you know why Mr. Helms would have asked
the President for authority to open mail in 1971, then?
Mr. Osborn. I have no idea.
Mr. Wallach. Calling your attention to a memorandum dated
February 16, 1973, captioned "Visit to Headquarters re STRE
POINTER," I will ask you to quickly read that over.
Mr. Osborn. I must have been Iden 18.
Mr. Wallach. The first question would be, do you recall
a meeting in your office at which you notified Mr. Issaeff
that the project would be terminated?
Mr. Osborn. I don't think I dealt with Issaeff. I think
I would have dealt with one of my people. But it could have
been Issaeff. I don't know. I remember suspending it.
Mr. Wallach. And do you remember telling Mr. Issaeff in
words or substance that he should not tell anyone on the CI
Staff that you wanted to tell the director of the CIA Staff
yourself?
Mr. Osborn. I very probably would have. I had very close
relationships with Jim Angleton professionally.
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 17 TOD SECDET
TOP SECRET
90
memorandum from Chief, CI."
Mr. Wallach. Calling your attention to the first page,
you stated this is Mr. Angleton's handwriting?
Mr. Osborn. Yes.
Mr. Wallach. I realize that most of it is illegible but
I ask if you can read the line that begins with Osborn.
Mr. Osborn. "Osborn said he was under instructions from
Colby to the effect that no pressure should be put on Cotter."
Mr. Wallach. Do you recall discussing that with Mr.
Colby or Mr. Angleton?
Mr. Osborn. No. But I do remember talking to Bill Colby
about the position that Cotter was in, and he was always
extremely sympathetic. And I don't know what pressure anybody
could put on Cotter.
Mr. Wallach. I believe you briefly touched on this before.
How was the operation actually terminated?
Mr. Osborn. I called in Stan Ense, I believe, who was
then Deputy Director of Security for Investigations and
Operational Support, and I said SR POINTER is terminated as
of now. I think it was in the early afternoon. And that was
the end of it.
Mr. Wallach. In other words, it was then Mr. Colby under
Schlesinger who terminated it?
Mr. Osborn. Yes.
Mr. Wallach. And I take it
NW 50955 DocId: 32281990 Page 18
TOP SECRET