157-10014-10125
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY:
SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10014-10125
MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
RECORD SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
07-M-31
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
ΤΟ :
TITLE:
DATE:
03/10/1976
PAGES:
78
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
SSCSGO, METHODOLOGY
COMMITTEE BUSINESS
TRANSCRIPT
Declassified
1B; IC
Redact
03/22/2000
CCBOX 324
AGENCY : SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page : 1
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10125
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-31
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TO :
TITLE
:
DATE: 03/10/76
PAGES: 78
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, METHODOLOGY
COMMITTEE BUSINESS
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS:
TRANSCRIPT
REFERRED
POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CCBOX 324
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
TOP SECRET
Vol. 2 OF 3
NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
Unauthorized Disclosure Subject
to Criminal Sanctions..
The United States Senate
Report of Proceedings
R2829
Hearing held before
Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities
Wednesday, March 10, 1976
Washington, D. C
(Stenotype Tape and Waste turned over
to the Committee for destruction)
WARD & PAUL
410 FIRST STREET, SE
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20003
(202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
WARD/smnl
TOOP SECRET
FOREIGN AND MILITARY SUBCOMMITTEE MEETING
Wednesday, March 10, 1976
United States Senate,
Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities,
Washington, D. C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:45 o'clock
p.m., in Room S-407, the Capitol, the Honorable Walter D.
Huddleston presiding.
Present:
Senators Huddleston (presiding), Hart of
Colorado and Mathias.
Staff: William G. Miller, Staff Director, and David
Aaron, Joseph diGenova, Lynn Davis, William Bader, Elizabeth
Culbreath, Charles Kirbow, Rick Inderfurth, Pat Shea, Elliot
Maxwell and Al Quanbeck, Professional Staff Members,
TOD SECDET
TOP SECRET
And then the question is whether or not there is a prohi-
bition on printing in the English language.
Mr. Bader. And as I heard the consensus this morning,
we would not move to that recommendation for a prohibition.
I did_not hear whether on the distribution this would be by
law, though I took it it was to be by law, though I can be
corrected on that.
I don't think we addressed that this morning.
Mr. Chairman, on these that we considered
that we have a fairly light record on or that
we are not too sure what the future holds, one of the members
that I rode over with on the car suggested that perhaps in those
instances we could recommend fairly strongly whatever we want
the followon people to do to ensure that the recommendation
does not create havoc within the Agency or does not leave the
rights of citizens unprotected.
But that is not a cop out. It is something that you
frequently do, say, let us reserve this for the permanent
oversight committee or for whatever other group. We may have
all the information we need.
Let them make the determination whether
or not it should be a statute.
Determine whether in the law whether it is
working all right under the set of regulations.
Mr. Chairman, may I say in this instance in
the publishing trade there is no lack of record? The evidence
TOD REPRET
TOP SECRET
PROCEEDINGS
Senator Huddleston. I call the Committee to order.
Mr. Aaron. I believe Bill Bader had the temerity to
summarize where we stand.
Mr. Bader. Mr. Chairman, where I think we are at the
moment is taking the three major issues before the Subcommittee
in the order they were presented, and discussed this morning,
the first being the academic issue, and as I heard the Subcom-
mittee this morning, then I will have another go at the
options, give enough options in the option paper and bring it
back before the Committee for a further look before we go on.
By Friday.
By Friday, without question.
I think by this time we will all have -- we will try to
include a positive option, that is to say,to approve if not.
applaud the expanded efforts of FRD to undertake these activi-
ties, or at least to endorse them.
Now, going to the second was the covert use of books and
publishing houses. We discussed two recommendations:
one which
I believe here the Committee has agreed to, and that is a
prohibition on the distribution or subsidy of any books,
magazines or other publications not attributed to the CIA in-
side the United States.
I think we can all accept that, can't
we.
TOP SECRET
and inquiry into it has been thorough, and I think we know this
well. There is no dispute from the Agency.
Well, is the law inconsistent with
the statute on the information service?
It is the same thing. I would recommend,
Mr. Chairman, that this would be by law, by statute.
On the publication.
On the publication.
I would support that.
I think Gary Hart would also, so I
think we will make that recommendation, that this one on the
academics is the one we are not sure of.
That's the one we would go forward with, and
now we are moving to I would also reiterate that in our
session the other night, I took it as agreement that the
recommendation by statute the CIA should be prohibited from
making operational use of all educational and cultural
grantees of all U.S. Government sponsored programs, this was the
issue which was raised of government funded programs such as
the Fulbright program.
And that's either already a regulation
or a directive or something to that effect.
Certain categories.
Certain categories.
That is brand new ground.
TAD REPORT.
TOP SECRET
Mr. diGenova. The John McCloy exceptions to that rule, they
are the only ones that are protected.
That justifies Charles' view that there are
some similarities between Ford Foundation and Government
sponsored activities.
Where our discussion was left before lunch
was on the question of the covert use of U.S. journalists and
media institutions, and as it was laid out, it was indicated
that the CIA's intended internal prohibition on the use of the
media extended to the internal prohibitions on the use, opera-
tional use of individuals, American and foreign, who were
accredited to American media organizations.
As I heard it this morning, what we were discussing and
moving to was to extend that prohibition to cover all American
individuals and media organizations, and that the question then
was whether this would be recommended to be something done in
law or a recommendation, or an insistence, if you will, to the
Agency that it further amend its internal directives, its
50-10, to put all media personnel, American media personnel on
the prohibited list, and that is I think where we were.
I think that's an accurate statement.
That's where we were.
I had expressed a thought that I thought that it ought to
be expanded to include all, but we should hold off on the
statute business for the time being.
TOP SECRET
Senator Mathias. My role here seems to be the Devil's
advocate.
Good.
There is no question about the writing
American press or the value in print domestically. Maybe the
role, any legitimate role that news men could, journalists,
writers could fulfill is available through the information
agencies, USIA and groups of that sort.
So does anybody know whether there is any real need
for allowing some latitude, which is not covered by situations
that can be envisioned under USIA or other programs?
Well, Senator, the one that I discussed earlier
that I probably didn't make my point well because no one
seemed to have picked it up, is we do, by the words here, if I
understand Mr. Bader, prohibit an American citizen living in
Brussels and working for a local newspaper there from having
anything to do with the CIA.
No we don't, do we?
You mean by his extension?
Yes, sir.
But not by
But wasn't that what you wanted to put in
the law, that you didn't know if you wanted
This is the point I wanted to raise
here.
TAR SPART
TOP SECRET
Mr. Kirbow. That kind of relationship is something that
we should stay away from because I don't see any harm in it,
nor do I think the record demonstrates any harm in it. I don't
see I don't know how in the world this person doing that
taints the minds of the American reading public, which is
apparently what you are trying you're not trying to protect
the newsman. You are trying to protect the reader who doesn't
know that what he's getting is being spoonfed to him from the
CIA, and I don't know why we would be so concerned about
protecting newsmen from working, or prohibiting them from
working, because I think they have a right to do that as
American citizens, just as they do to work with the Department
of Defense or any other agency.
You would then rescind the Agency's standing
prohibition?
I just don't think you ever prohibit it in
law.
Are you talking bout an affiliated,
accredited journalist, because that's what the Agency regulation
deals with. It doesn't deal with an American citizen. It
deals with an accredited person, whether he is a foreign
national or an American.
To an American media organization...
But that's not the example Charles gave
you.
TAP APPART
TOP SECRET
Mr. Kirbow. Well, perhaps I misunderstand the extension
that you, your full recommendation.
Do you want to go beyond where the administration is in
their position?
I am recommending to go beyond where the
Administration is at this stage, to extend the operational
prohibition on the part of CIA to use American -- Americans in
the media
Wherever located.
Where they are using them undercover, at this
stage, to the extent that it is a cover proposition.
Even if they are in foreign media?
Yes, sir.
And even though all of their
activities are related to foreign; they are not writing for
American news services.
Alternately, they could be with American
media organizations.
Mr. Chairman, I don't think there is a single
shred of evidence on our record that that is in any way wrong-
doing or in any way adversely affects the rights of American
citizens. Clearly it will prohibit or could prohibit in the
future the proper use of an individual that could be essential
to the intelligence collection processes of the CIA, and it
singles out a specific agency which is not doing any harm to
the American citizenry, and says no, you cannot do this because
you happen to be a secret organization.
If I wanted to do it, Charlie, I think
I could work out a scheme. I would hire a prominent American
columnist to go and live in Paris, as Art Buchwald did, for
example.
And to pick off his columns and run them
in the New York Times.
And run them in the Paris Trib first,
and then let the domestic press pick him up...
But if he's in the Paris Trib, that's an
affiliated U.S.
Well, suppose he writes for the Financial
Times?
Well, you could work out an echo program
if you wanted.
Well, the basic point, instead
of picking instances, it seems to me, is whether or not as an
official policy of the United States Government we want an
institution such as the press with all it means and all it is
supposed to be in American with its constitútional provisions and
whatever, to be subverted to the secret, clandestine operation
that it can;
Anytime we put any prohibition anywhere, we are
eliminating somebody as a potential agent. You can't use
that as a guideline.
TAAPPAAT