157-10014-10067
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Date: 08/06/95
Page: 1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10067
RECORDS SERIES: HEARINGS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 09-H-08
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM: TWEEDY, BRONSON
TO:
TITLE :
DATE: 09/09/75
PAGES: 76
SUBJECTS:
CONGO
ASSASSINATION, LUMUMBA
CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS: 1A
CURRENT STATUS: RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 09/25/98
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS :
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId:32423455 Page 1
TOP SECRET ORIGINAL
Vol 1 OF 3
NATIONAL SECURITY
INFORMATION
Unauthorised Disclosure Subject
to Criminal Sanctions
The Nuited States Senate
R1124
Report of Proceedings
Hearing held before
Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations With Respect to Intelligence Activities
Tuesday, September 9, 1975
Washington, D. C.
(Stenotype Tape and Waste turned over
to the Committee for destruction)
WARD & PAUL
410 FIRST STREET, S. E.
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20003
(202) 544-6000
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
CONTENTS
TESTIMONY OF
Bronson Tweedy
PAGE
EXHIBITS
NUMBER
Tweedy Exhibit No. 1
Tweedy Exhibit No. 2
Tweedy Exhibit No. 3
Tweedy Exhibit No. 4
Tweedy Exhibit No. 5
Tweedy Exhibit No. 6
Tweedy Exhibit No. 7
(The above exhibits were retained by counsel.)
3
44
47
49
50
56
62
65
TOP SECRET
EXECUTIVE SESSION
Tuesday, September 9, 1975
United States Senate,
Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with respect to
Intelligence Activities,
Washington, D. C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:15 p.m.,
in Room 443, Russell Office Building, Senator Walter F.
Mondale presiding.
Present: Senator Mondale (presiding).
Also present: Rhett Dawson and Frederick Baron,
Professional Staff Members.
TOP SECRET
Senator Mondale. Do you swear the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Tweedy. I do.
Mr.Baron. Mr. Tweedy, are you aware that you have
the right to counsel here today?
Mr. Tweedy. I am.
Mr. Baron. And are you appearing voluntarily here
today without counsel?
Mr. Tweedy. I am.
(At this point, the hearing was removed to Room 608,
Carroll Arms Hotel.)
Mr. Baron. Are you also aware that all of your
Constitutional rights are intact before the Committee, includ-
ing your Fifth Amendment rights?
Mr. Tweedy. I am.
Mr. Baron. Mr. Tweedy, are you aware that you have
the right to cease answering questions at any time and
consult with an attorney?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes. I gather that was implicit in what
you said in the Senator's office.
Mr. Baron. It was.
Now, that we are no longer in the Senator's presence
I would like to make it clear to you that you are under no
obligation to continue testifying, although the Committee
TOP SECRET
would obviously appreciate it if you would.
Are you willing to do so?
Mr. Tweedy. I have no intention of not cooperating.
Mr. Baron. And you are willing to continue to testify
to the truth as best you can?
Mr. Tweedy. Indeed I will.
Mr. Baron. Perhaps we should begin by putting on the
record a bit of your background in Agency activities leading
to the point at which you assumed the position as Chief of
the African Division.
TESTIMONY OF BRONSON TWEEDY
Mr. Tweedy. I came aboard the Agency in the first of
May, 1947 and after training was sent to Switzerland.
returned in 1950 and did a series of desk jobs in what was known
as the Central European Division, I guess, and went through
a number of different assignments at that time, until May
of 1953 when I went out as Chief of Station to Vienna, Austria.
I was there until the middle of 1956 and returned very
briefly to the States, went to London as Deputy Chief of
Station there. I took over as Chief of Station there in the
middle of 1958 and was then replaced by Frank Wisner, in
London early in October 1959, and I took over the
African Division I should think somewhere around between the
15th and 18th of November 1959.
That brings me up to date.
TOP SECRET
Mr. Baron. And how long did you serve as Chief of
the African Division?
Mr. Tweedy. Until September of '63.
Mr. Baron. In that position did you consult frequent
with people in policy-making positions at the State Department?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, as I was explaining to you as we
were strolling around, the simple answer to that is yes.
These consultations would take many, many different forms.
On the Congo, for example, the State Department
obviously was just as involved as practically the rest of the
U.S. Government and they had a Congolese task force. I
would attend their meetings or a representative of mine would
attend their meetings. They took place almost daily,
sometimes I guess even more than once daily.
Mr. Baron. During what period of time?
Mr. Tweedy. Oh, Lord, from the time the Congo thing
really hotted up, and I am talking then particularly under the
Kennedy Administration, when Mennen Williams organized the
task force and Wayne Fredericks was his deputy; those meet-
ings were State's meetings, they weren't CIA meetings, they
weren't meetings primarily to discuss the CIA policy, but
we had to be there to maintain, to keep abreast of what the
policy was.
Mr. Baron. If we could focus our attention on the
period between the independence of the Congo in June of '60
and the announcement of the death of Lumumba in February of '61.
TOP SECRET
Mr. Tweedy. Was that the month of his death?
Mr. Baron. The month the death was announced.
As you know, there is a lot of mystery surrounding his
death and the probable cause of his death. As far as the U.S.
investigation was concerned it was January 17 or perhaps
January 18, 1961.
Mr. Tweedy. Yes.
Mr. Baron. What was the nature of your contact with
the State Department during that period of time?
Mr. Tweedy. My recollection of this is far less
Congo and far more general, as I was mentioning to you as
we strolled, and particularly my talks with Jim Penfield, to
whom Joe Satterswate was dedicated.
Joe Satterswate, who was Assistant Secretary for
African Affairs, and Penfield and I were colleagues in Vienna
together. He had the minister. But we did a great deal of
talking together about CIA deployment in Africa. I was
forming a division both at home and abroad and I had a lot
of things to negotiate with him about State cover for
and he naturally had his views on a lot of the things
we wanted to do, and we spent a great deal of time arguing
these things out, making arrangements and so on and so forth.
To be frank with you, I have far less recollection of
intimate policy talks on places like the Congo with that
particular group than I did after 19-what, the beginning of
TOP SECRET
the Kennedy Administration.
Mr. Baron. It was during the Kennedy Administration
that the large scale paramilitary operations in the Congo were
geared up.
Mr. Tweedy. All that happened then, absolutely.
Mr. Baron. Do you remember discussions with Livingstone
Merchant in the State Department before the turn of Administra-
tions?
Mr. Tweedy. I knew Livingstone Merchant but specific
discussions with him I really do not recall, no. Later on
I remember having a couple of meetings along with Mr. Rusk.
Mr. Baron. Did any of those meetings concern Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. No, Mr. Rusk, I think they exclusively
concerned Portuguese Africa.
Mr. Baron. Do you remember having any meetings alone
with Herter, Secretary Herter, about Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. I am not sure I have had a meeting with Mr.
Herter.
Mr. Baron. Did you have any meetings with Secretary
Herter or Douglas Dillon or Livingstone Merchant?
Mr. Tweedy. Never met Mr. Dillon.
Mr. Baron. About Congolese affairs?
Mr. Tweedy. Never met Mr. Dillon and I do not recall
having met with Livingstone Merchant on the Congo. I may
have done so but I really don't recall, I had very little
TOP SECRET
professional contact with Mr. Merchant. I knew him mostly
slightly socially.
Mr. Baron. When you met regularly with Mr. Satterswate
or Mr. Penfield did you discuss Lumumba with them?
Mr. Tweedy. I am sure we discussed Lumumba in the
sense of which would be all the time, assessing the situa-
tion, assessing where Lumumba was heading, where the Congo
was heading. I did this with, you know, almost all of the
African situations, individual African country situations.
We would spend a great deal of time, their points of
view, our point of view, our perspective, their perspective,
but never as an action matter that I can recall.
Mr. Baron. Was the assassination of Patrice Lumumba
ever contemplated or raised in those meetings?
Mr. Tweedy. Never.
Mr. Baron. Did you meet regularly in this period
between Congolese independence and the announced death of
Lumumba with people at the NSC level or people in the White
House?
Mr. Tweedy. I don't recall so at all. For example, if
President Eisenhower had an African representative the same
way President Kennedy later had, then I can't recall who he
was. President Kennedy had two. The first name escapes
me. He later went on down to South Africa as Ambassador
and one that I saw most of for a considerable period of
TOP SECRET
time was Carl Kazen, recently retired head of the School of
Advanced Studies in Princeton.
Mr. Baron. During the Eisenhower Administration did
you have direct contact with Gordon Gray or Andrew Goodpaster
with reference to Congolese affairs.
You are shaking your head and we have to put it on
the record.
Mr. Tweedy. I am almost convinced that the answer is
no. I am just thinking. I know Gordon Gray quite well.
I don't recall ever having policy discussions with him at all,
nor General Goodpaster. I think the answer is certainly no.
Mr. Baron. You mentioned to me earlier that you had
attended only two National Security Council meetings in your
memory and that those two meetings were both long after the
death of Lumumba, is that correct?
Mr. Tweedy. I can only imagine that they must have been
because this was well into the Kennedy Administration. I
wouldn't be able to put any dates on it now.
Mr. Baron. It was during the directorship of John
McCone at CIA?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, that is without question. And
McBundy was at the meetings. Yes, it must have been
well after the death of Lumumba, maybe even the following
year.
Mr. Baron. During the latter part of the Eisenhower
TOP SECRET
Administration when events in Congo were heating up, after
Congolese independence, what was the general atmosphere in
the State Department and at the CIA in relation to Lumumba,
the general attitude toward Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, I think you would have to start by
saying what was the general assessment of the situation in
the Congo. Lumumba was really sort of the last thing you
came down to.
The worry in Washington about the situation in the
Congo was that here was the largest geographical expression
in Africa that threatened to go up in smoke, up because the
Kremlin was about to march in and take it over, not because
it was about to break up tribally and do all the things that
those African countries in their early years were at least
vulnerable to. The only trouble with the Congo was if it
happened there the side effects would have been infinitely
greater than, of course, if it had happened anywhere else.
Mr. Baron. What would those side effects have been?
Mr. Tweedy. All one could do was assess those, but it
would have set a precedent, for example, the neighboring
country by which great store was set by the West was Nigeria
and if the same infection crossed that border one was afraid
that this would go up in smoke and that in effect there
was a possibility of the continent disintegrating before it
really had had a chance to get under way under its own aegis.
TOP SECRET
This was the concern.
Mr. Baron. Were these political side effects only
that were being taken into account or were there also
fears for American business interests in the Congo that
were part of the side effects?
Mr. Tweedy. Insofar as my assessments were concerned,
and those of the Agency and any conversations I can recall
with the State Department, American business was just not a
great factor.
If you want to talk about business, the big factor, of
course, was Katanga and eventually when Tshombe threatened to
succeed resulting in the great involvement of both the U.S. and
the U.S. in the Congo affair, the fear there was that if you
put together the Congo without Katanga it was like construct-
ing a Cadillac and purposely omitting the gas station.
Mr. Baron. That is because Katanga is the home of
most of the natural resources that are in the Congo.
Mr. Tweedy. That is the only thing that keeps that
country going.
Now, I don't say there weren't a lot of economic con-
siderations in back of that but these were political
economic concerns much more than anything parochial, but is
what was going to happen to U.S. business was not a factor inso-
far as I recall.
Mr. Baron. So the primary concern was for political
TOP SECRET
stability in Africa.
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, political stability in Africa. In
a quick phrase you put your foot right on that.
Mr. Dawson. During the summer of 1960 you mentioned
earlier that in the time frame you did not think the
Kremlin was ready to march in there, as that was a fear with
you but
Mr. Tweedy. I don't mean to say this was nothing that
anybody was worried about but it was not the primary concern.
Mr. Dawson. But there was significant Soviet interest
in infiltrating and taking advantage of the situation in the
Congo?
Mr. Tweedy. I think it would be much more accurate
to say it was our assumption, we were not privy to Soviet
intentions with respect to Africa, which I suspect in those
days like a great many other things about African culture
round the globe were ill informed at that point, and un-
doubtedly seeking their own policies in Africa just the way this
country was. It was obviously a worry.
Mr. Baron. Was it also our assumption if the Soviets
moved into the Congo they would move on the side of Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. Oh, yes, I think there would have been
little doubt in our minds that that would have been the case.
Mr. Baron. And is it also true that the general perception
at the Agency and in the State Department was that Lumumba
TOP SECRET
posed the threat in the Congo beyond the mere threat of
political instability because of his closeness to the Soviets
or his willingness to accept aid from the Soviets?
Mr. Tweedy. It made the cheese more binding but I
don't think we had any information indicating there was
any close umbilicus between the Soviets and Lumumba but it
was potentially there.
Mr. Baron. And that potential --
Mr. Tweedy. This increased one's nervousness about the
situation.
Mr. Baron. In your capacity as Chief of the African
Division to whom did you report and from whom did you receive
orders?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, the normal chain of command was
through DDD, Dick Bissell and --
Mr. Baron. Would you meet regularly with Richard
Bissell during this period of time?
Mr. Tweedy. Regularly would be a big word. Not
necessarily that often. We might talk on the phone. To
say that I saw him all the time, how often I don't know. It
would go in fits and starts, undoubtedly but --
Mr. Baron. In formulating actions to be taken in the
Congo, would you consult with Bissell before you undertook
any major operation.
Mr. Tweedy. Well, depending on what you mean by
TOP SECRET
major operation. Major operation per se, if you are not
talking about just intelligence operations, call for in-
structions and formalization either inside the Agency or out-
side.
Mr. Baron. So any major covert action would be
formulated in consultation not only with Bissell but with the
DCI, Allen Dulles at that time, and probably higher levels
than that.
Mr. Tweedy. I suppose the DCI, if Bissell felt that
was necessary, and, of course, he used to talk to the
DCI without my being present, and undoubtedly certain instruc-
tions I would receive from time to time undoubtedly stem from
conversations that Bissell would have had with the DCI and
funnelled down to me.
I didn't always know who talked to whom before I re-
ceived instructions.
Mr. Baron. So if you received an instruction from
Richard Bissell as DDP you would proceed to implement that
instruction on the assumption it was fully authorized above
the level of DDP?
Mr. Tweedy. I think I would proceed with it on the
basis that he was authorized to give me instructions
and it was up to him to bloody well know what he was empowered
to tell me to do.
I couldn't run his affairs for him to that extent, but
TOP SECRET
by and large I reckon the Agency worked and that was the way
it was set up to work and that is the way it worked, but to
say every time Bissell talked to me he always talked to
Allen Dulles first I would think is nonsense.
Mr. Baron. You didn't consider it your duty to question
Bissell about the source of authority for some covert action
he was asking you to undertake?
Mr. Tweedy. I would have never hesitated to do if
I felt that it was necessary to do so.
I can't recall having done so. He and I used to have
disagreements philosophically on operations. We were very
good friends and I never had any hesitation about telling him
when I thought he didn't make any sense but --
Mr. Dawson. Could you describe that philosophical
difference, or is it describable?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, it varied a lot. I think Dick was
by and large inclined to feel that almost anything was
possible, you know, in the clandestine service, if they put
their minds to it, and my view was this wasn't the case.
Mr. Dawson. Thank you.
Mr. Baron. Did you ever discuss the question of
assassinating Lumumba with Richard Bissell?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, this was the way the whole thing
came up in the first instance. I can't remember how it came
up except undoubtedly we had a conversation.
TOP SECRET
Mr. Baron. Do you recall when it came up?
Mr. Tweedy. No, I don't. It obviously must have
come up, I assume, what, the fall of 1960. But I have no
way of putting a date to it.
Mr. Baron. And what was said during that discussion or
perhaps I should backtrack first and ask whether this was one
discussion or a series of discussions?
Mr. Tweedy. Oh, we must have discussed it more than
once. I think it came up in the sense that Dick would have
said we probably better be thinking about whether it might
ever be necessary or desirable to get rid of Lumumba, in which
case we presumably should be in position to assess whether we
could do it or not successfully.
Mr. Baron. Do it, meaning carry off an assassination?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, but it was never discussed with him
in any other sense but a planning exercise, but a planning
exercise which, in other words, never were we instructed
to do anything of this kind. We were instructed to ask whether
such a thing would be feasible and to have the Chief of
Station be thinking along those lines as well.
Mr. Baron. So, in effect you were asked to move
ahead at least as far as developing the capability to
carry of an assassination if an order should be given?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, or to examine the potential for
doing that.
TOP SECRET
Mr. Dawson. I know that you have indicated you
won't be able to put a precise date to this conversation
with Bissell or conversations with Bissell, but maybe we can
narrow it down a little bit.
Would you assume that it would be after the proclama-
tion of the Congolese independence on June 30, 1960?
Mr. Tweedy. Oh, yes.
Mr. Dawson. Would you assume it would be before
Lumumba's being put into U.N. protective custody on
September 15, 1960?
Mr. Tweedy. I think it must have been, yes. I
didn't realize he had gone into custody that early.
Mr. Baron. So then it would be sometime during the
summer or early fall of '60?
Mr. Tweedy. What happened to Lumumba after that?
Mr. Baron. He was in protective custody at the United
Nations force from mid-September until late November and
it was in late November that he left to go traveling
towards Stanleyville and he was captured by Mobutu's troop
at that point in very early December and from early December
until mid-January he was in the custody of the Congolese in
prison and then it was in mid-January 1961 that he was
flown from a prison in Tysville to Katanga where his death
was announced shortly thereafter.
Mr. Tweedy. That I recall. I have got to assume it
TOP SECRET
was sometime after September 15th. I don't know.
Mr. Baron. When you say "after" --
Mr. Tweedy. After you put September 15 the day he
came under. The only thing is I have no recollection that
it would have happened as early as, say, early August or
early September.
Mr. Baron. It was in August or early September that
Lumumba was Premier of the Congo?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes.
Mr. Baron. And there was obviously a struggle for power
between Lumumba and Kasavubu going on.
Mr. Dawson. I guess the crucial question.
Mr. Tweedy. You have really got me at this point.
Mr. Dawson. It would be whether or not you would have
considered the plan had he been in U.N. protective custody.
If you assume that would be the case, then I don't think
any more precision in the date would necessarily be productive.
Mr. Tweedy. My whole recollection of the thing would
be that only purpose of the exercise would have been to have
a plan when he was in nobody's custody.
Mr. Baron. That would have been before --
Mr. Tweedy. That is the only thing that makes sense
to me, September, because --
Mr. Baron. Well, I will go on.
In a moment I will show you some cable traffic that
TOP SECRET
went back and forth between headquarters and the Congo after
he was in U.N. custody to see if that refreshes your recollec-
tion about the general attitude with regard to Lumumba at
that time.
Mr. Tweedy. Yes.
Mr. Baron. But, you are saying now, that it would
only make sense to you that --
Mr. Tweedy. In retrospect nothing makes sense to me
but --
Mr. Baron. -- that this initial consideration of the
feasibility of the assassination of Lumumba between Bissell
and yourself?
Mr. Tweedy. I should have thought that would have
been during the period when he was in effect in power. I
should have thought, but the record may prove me wrong.
Mr. Baron. Did you have any discussion with Bissell
where he indicated that his own consideration of the assassina-
tion of Lumumba had moved beyond the realm of possibility to
an actual plan that he was prepared to carry out or taking
steps to carry out.
Mr. Tweedy. I cannot recall a conversation with
Bissell where in effect he said, let's move from A to B or C
to D or something like this. I do not recall that. My
recollection of the whole interval when this was under con-
sideration was that it was a planning interval and at no point
TOP SECRET
can I recall that I even felt it was imminent that somebody
would say go, (a) we never came up with a plan that was
go-able, or anything really very close to it. It was
always my assumption that at the time anything like this should
occur there would have been some kind of real focus on the
problem at probably a very considerable policy level within
the Agency at which somebody would have said something
more about it and it never occurred to me I would get a call
or Bissell would ask me to come down to his office and say
go to it.
Nor were we ever in position where he said that I would
merely implement plan so-and-so. We never got that far.
Mr. Baron. You didn't have any action plans for
assassination of Lumumba that you had prepared or were aware
of?
Mr. Tweedy. No. Planning, yes, but nothing that ever
got anywhere.
Mr. Baron. What kind of planning was done?
Mr. Tweedy. It was mostly the kind of thing where one
asked the Chief of Station to keep in mind what sort of
access one might ever have had to Lumumba for whatever purpose.
It was this kind of thing, as best I recollect.
Mr. Baron. Did you send cables raising the question of
gaining access to Lumumba for the purpose of assassinating
him?
TOP SECRET
Mr. Tweedy. I suspect that was the first cable that
ever went out. In other words, the first cable that ever
went out to Larry Hedgman. He must have realized, he would
have been perfectly clear on his end, the way one's minds were
running even though it was purely a contingency.
Mr. Baron. I am sorry. I don't think I understood
that. You say the first cable that went out.
Mr. Tweedy. That was the first way that Hedgman was
ever advised that there was any thinking of that kind in
Washington, was via our cable. I am sure he wasn't back in
the States over anything of this kind.
Mr. Baron. Today you distinctly remember a cable sent?
Mr. Tweedy. I think I remember that much more distinctly
than anything I remember in the last few minutes that it
was a cable which asked him to be thinking of that.
Mr. Baron. That was pursuant to your conversation
with Mr. Bissell?
Mr. Tweedy. That was.
Mr. Baron. Did you send that cable or Mr. Bissell
send that cable.
Mr. Tweedy. It probably would have been a cable I
would have written and probably released by him.
Mr. Baron. Do you know what was in that cable?
Mr. Tweedy. God knows, I don't.
TOP SECRET
Mr. Baron. Or the effect of the language in the cable?
Mr. Tweedy. The effect of the language in the cable
would be to get Hedgman to be thinking along these lines.
Mr. Dawson. Would you describe the purpose?
Mr. Tweedy. It would have been the eventuality that we
might wish to get rid of Mr. Lumumba personally.
Mr. Dawson. Is that language you think might have
been used or that is how you think it might have been done?
Mr. Tweedy. I couldn't even start to reproduce the
cable.
Mr. Baron. Did you send a number of such cables to
the Chief of Station?
Mr. Tweedy. I imagine there were a few over a period
of time. It was not an intensive correspondence as I
remember it.
Mr. Baron. It wouldn't be the normal practice to
have an intensive correspondence on such a sensitive subject,
would it?
Mr. Tweedy. I don't know. It is the only time I ever
had one but I have had very sensitive subjects, operationally
sensitive subjects that I have dealt with in extensive
cables over a very long period of time, but nothing of this
nature whatsoever.
Mr. Baron. Were these cables from headquarters to
the Chief of Station in Leopoldville sent in a specially
TOP SECRET
restricted channel?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, all sensitive cables are sent in
various types of restricted channels I am sure you aware.
Mr. Baron. This channel even more tightly held and
closely restricted than the normal cable traffic that would
flow to the Chief of Station?
Mr. Tweedy. That would be a very fair statement,
yes.
Mr. Baron. Do you know whether the cable included in-
structions to destroy it after reading it?
Mr. Tweedy. That wouldn't have been normal.
Mr. Baron. Would you assume that on a subject like this
such an instruction would have been given?
Mr. Tweedy. It would really be up to the Chief of
Station, I think. It would be up to the Chief of Station
what was in the cable and the degree to which he felt he
needed to maintain a record for quick reference purposes in
the future. But, he was perfectly capable of keeping a file
which would be accessible only to him and the station and
if he was sure of his own security within the station I don't
think this would have been a problem for him, but to answer your
question I don't know what Hedgman himself did.
Mr. Baron. What kind of response did you receive from
Hedgman or from the Chief of Station in Leopoldville?
TOP SECRET
Mr. Tweedy. It was a serious answer. I can't do
better than that. It was a serious answer. It wasn't argu-
mentative, I guess it started to discuss, not the pros and
cons of policy, at least I don't recall it did, but what it
was that he might be able to do. It was a disciplined reply
to an instruction from headquarters.
Mr. Baron. Did he mention any specific means that
he had of gaining access to Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. I don't recall now. I don't recall. I
think he said it was certainly not beyond the question that
means could either be developed or might arise but I certainly
do not recall that he came up with any very specific ideas in
the first instance.
Mr. Baron. At the time that you were requesting the
Chief of Station to report back on means of gaining access
to Lumumba for the purpose of eliminating him, was this
access made any more explicit in terms of the kind of
personal access that would be needed?
Mr. Tweedy. I am sure that must have been covered
at some point, i.e., in perhaps a series of types of accesses.
Mr. Baron. Would this be access to shoot him or would
this be access to his personal food or drink or toiletries?
Mr. Tweedy. I suppose all those types of things might
have been considered.
Mr. Baron. But this was not access in the sense of --
TOP SECRET
finding a way to sneak inside the U.N. guard to simply
snatch Lumumba from custody, this was clearly access to assassin-
ate him, is that correct?
Mr. Tweedy. That would certainly be my recollection.
Kidnapping was never a factor that I recall at all or even
considered, at least I don't remember it.
Mr. Baron. In your discussions with Richard Bissell
about the prospect of assassinating Lumumba, did he mention to
you that he had had similar discussions with Justin O'Donnell?
Mr. Tweedy. I was reminded of Justin O'Donnell's
role in all this. As you may recall, when I talked to you
and Mr. Wides, and until you reminded me I had forgotten
that Justin O'Donnell played any role whatsoever and now
that it has been brought to my recollection I recall it.
I recall it almost in detail.
I remember being told that he had expressed reservations
or disagreement or refusal to participate to Bissell and I
think my response to you was if he said that I would believe
him but I didn't recall it.
Mr. Baron. Did Richard Bissell ever indicate to you
that he had asked Justin O'Donnell to go to the Congo to
assassinate Lumumba?
Mr. Tweedy. Well, he must have indeed have told me
that he was going to ask O'Donnell to go to the Congo to
examine the thing on the ground, but I don't recall him ever
TOP SECRET
saying, I am going to send O'Donnell to the Congo to knock
off Lumumba, not in those words.
Mr. Baron. When you say examine the thing on the ground
you mean he would send O'Donnell to the Congo to take a
first-hand look at the means?
Mr. Tweedy. Yes, conceivably I suppose this all
might have resulted in a climax there but at least my recollec-
tion certainly was never that he told me that I am sending
O'Donnell to the Congo to knock off Lumumba in those words
but that he, I am sure the philosophy was that if anything
was done you would want to keep it as separate from the
station as possible and thus a man from the outside.
It was Bissell's idea that O'Connell might be the man.
Mr. Baron. Outside the station?
Mr. Tweedy. Outside the station.
Mr. Baron. The CIA station in the Congo?
Mr. Tweedy. Right.
Mr. Baron. That such a man would be necessary to
carry out an assassination operation if one were to be mounted?
Mr. Tweedy. That if one was mounted it would
obviously be desirable to do it under auspices which would
protect the security of the station or involvement of the
station. That I am sure was the philosophy behind it.
Mr. Baron. But it is your recollection that O'Donnell
TOP SECRET
was sent to the Congo to assess the possibility for
assassinating Lumumba rather than to mount some sort of kid-
napping plan to draw Lumumba out from the U.N. guard and put
him in the hands of Congolese authorities?
Mr. Tweedy. That is certainly my recollection but I
would not want to put too high a value on it. I
just don't recall kidnapping as a factor is all.
Mr. Baron. Did Richard Bissell ever mention to you that
lethal biological agents had been developed in the CIA
laboratories for possible use in the Congo to assassinate Lumumba?
Or they were available for such use?
Mr. Tweedy. I think that it would be closer that TSD
probably had the capability or had the agent or whatever it
was. When I say agent I mean chemical agent. I suspect I
heard that, yes.
Mr