157-10014-10121
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY:
SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10014-10121
MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
RECORD SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
07-M-27
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
PAGES:
03/09/1976
147
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
SSCSGO, METHODOLOGY
COMMITTEE BUSINESS
TRANSCRIPT
Declassified
1B; IC
Redact
03/22/2000
CCBOX 324
v9.1
1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 1
1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page : 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10121
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-27
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TO :
TITLE
:
DATE: 03/09/76
PAGES: 147
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, METHODOLOGY
DOCUMENT TYPE:
COMMITTEE BUSINESS
TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CCBOX 324
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 2
TOP SECRE
Vol
2 of 3
NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
Unauthorized Disclosure Subject
to Criminal Sanctions
The United States Senate R2784
Report of Proceedings
Hearing held before
Senate SElect Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities
Tuesday, March 9, 1976
Washington, D. C
(Stenotype Tape and Waste turned over
to the Committee for destruction)
NW 50955 DocId:32423509 Page 3
INTOLACCINVESTIGATION
Foreign & Military Subcommittee Meeting
Tuesday, March 9, 1976
United States Senate,
Selist Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to
Intelligence Activities,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10.30 o'clock
in Room S-407, the Capitol
Senator Walter D. Hiddleston
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present.
Senators Huddleston, presiding. Hart of
Colorado, and Mathias.
Also present: William Miller, Staff Director. Also present:
digenova. Charles Kirbow. Ellict Maxwell, Elizabeth Culbreth,
Joseph
Jan Orloff. William Bader
Lynn Davis. Al Quanbeck, Charles
Lombard. Rick Inderfurth. Bob Kelley. Greg reverton Jim
Johnston and Britt Snider. Professional Staff Member.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 4
PPDMEDINGS
Senator Huddleston.
fetis come to order.
Mr. Aaron. The agenda today is to proceed with the DCI
section and in addition we would like to get the Subcommittee's
if you will substantive arproval of the paper on the production
of intelligence so that it might go to the Agency and we could
go through the process of clearing its details.
I don't know which of those you wish to take up first
but
Mr. Kirhow. We should really take up the paper first
because it already went out this morning.
Mr. Aaron. Well.. they are realing it but we have not
negotiated with them yet..
Senator Huddleston. Any comment on that paper?
Mr. Miller. Which parer?
Senator Huddleston. The production of intelligence.
Mr. Aaron.
It is in the larger book.
Mr. Kirbow. Senator, I have some comments but I
defer to the Senators if they have some comments first
Mr. Aaron. It's at Tab MI
C6.
Senator Huddleston. Charley, go ahead,
Mr. Kirbow. Thank you.
The concern that has been expressed by the senior
witnessed from the Jam end other parts of the coremi.Ev
not ante bafore this Coud ה על
a patter of record for
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 5
The Senators. I'm sure the knowthat the big
Fight
in
the House last vear was to avoid the excruciating details on
budget figures and I think we had kind of discussed perhaps
publishing 3 or 4 major features I'd like to point out that in
this particular document, sucy great detail as that portion of the
CIA, the DDI which produces intelligence, we speak of an
authorized project to $70.9 million with 2.269 employees, exact
percentage of the Aαργαν'ς duet and the exct percentage of the
personnel, That one page of this document is probably the most
classified single compilation.
Senator Huddleston:
What page is that?
Mr. Kirbow.
Page 3.
Senator Huddleston. Of course it's out of the Agency.
I would assume they would have some comment on it.
Mr. Aaron. The point was not, the view was not to
produce these precise numbers but A, to have them for the
Subcommittee so that they could understand them and much as
in the case of the DCI's original paper to expect that these
things will be modified and to lay the basis for an appropriate
discussion with them as to how one might modify it and yet
canture the essence of the aramient, and we'll inst see how
far that aces in trving to reach
Certainly we lam
Senator
intention of
wo say this Department
represents a substanti
enditure with a large number of
TOP SECRET
PAUL
NW 50955 DocId:32423509 Page 6
emplovees?
Mr. Kirbow. Well
iF
could tell you what my position
on it is, in speaking to Beth Bloomfield last night I specificall
asked her wall, she says that's to give them something out
there to take out so that we'll have enough left in here that
would be a worthwhile doorment at the end.
And I think that if we are kidding ourselves that we
have either the time or
and we should not have the inclination
in my opinion to waste the time of the people at the Agency
or anything by "putting in things which will give Mr. Boldin
something to gnaw on so he won't bother the rest of the thing,
I just didn't think that we were going to get into that kind
of dealing with the Agency people. I thought we were going to
be forthright in what we thought we should put in and what we
would put in a document like this because the whole production
of intelligence thing or the whole theme of the paper is
this inadequate attention given to the analytical portion of
production.
And if we are doing this and sending it out there in
this classified form full well knowing at the outset she
says, well, that's not even material. If they want to take it
out. just take it out.
Well, if it's not mateziol, I would hope that we're not
wasting both our
last month.
wave read shout 10,000 le in the
TOP SECRET
.. מייש
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 7
Senator Huddlesto!!. I think it's probably material to
also to have a firmer graar when we start discussing and defendinc
the report maybe, even to the extent of having specific figures.
I think it's highly unlikely that they will let that stay
in there and we'll probably bave to modify it. I see your point
in a way that we might save ourselves time by scaling it down
to begin with to what we think will be acceptable, but on the
other hand. we may not guest right.
Mr. Kirbow. Well. for the record then. Senator. I do
have exception to this type writing where we deliberately beef
it up with known classified information full well knowing that
it's going to be taken out and not get to the point that w
are trying to make. But I won't dwell on it any further.
Senator Huddleston.
Do you have any comment on that
aspect, Senator Hart?
Senator Hart. No,
Senator Huddleston,
All right, that one's ready to go.
Mr. Aaron. Thank you.
Now we left off vesterdaylon page 25.
We had discussed
two oral proposals by way of recommendations.
The first was
to set a tone for the DCI which was rejected and the second
was to confirm the new community wide deputy for the DCI to
have him subiect to Senate confirmation to establish him as,
in effect the first depute of the DCI, the man who would succeed
in his place
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 8
We also discussed briefly the recommendation nwaber 16
and we agreed that we would make some change in the language
relating to what in effect is the re-establishment of the board
of national estimates to make clear that they weren't there just
for the purpose of endorsing estimates but from the standpoint
that they are there for the purpose of reviewing them.
So the next recommendation is recommendation 17, and it
is long and complicated. Essentially what the recommendation
does is spell out more orecisely what the DCI's responsibilities
will be for the overall allocation of resources and coordination
of the community's activities apart from the production of
finished intelligence, which is the purpose of recommendation
16.
Now what it does, the first paragraph summarizes the
essential responsibilities along the lines of the President's
Executive Order.
Now it is slightly different from the Executive Order
in the following sense. The Executive Order establishes an
NSC Committee, gives the Committee the responsibility of
preparing a national intelligence budget, makes the DCI the
Chairman of that Committee. and gives the OCI in his person,
if you will, the responsibility for presenting that budget to the
President
Now we f
of cut louch that somewhat complicated and
not entirely clear allocation of authority to the DCI by simply
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423509 Page 9
saving he is responsible for preparing the community's budget,
and he has this Committee for this purpose in trying to place
responsibility squarely on him to do that.
Now this would not mean, however, that the Secretary of
Defense be senior to him in the cabinet. I mean the National
Security Council could not make a reclama and could not go over
his head.
That situation will till exist and this Committee is
In fact a committee of the National Security Council, so there
is another laver at which inter-Agency disputes, if they continue
beyond the level of the Committee on Foreign Intelligence
where they could be resolved.
Now the first it also designates him as responsible
for preparing the budgetland providing quidance for operations
programs in general terms and puts him in as chairman of the
appropriate NSC committee, and then we reference the CFI and
then authorize the following specific responsibilities.
First of all, the establishment of national intelligence
requirements for the entire community and it empowers him to
draw upon representatives of the members of the intelligence
community to help him in the task of establishing these requiremen
Now this is an increase in his authority from his
current postute. He has now the authority to issue wildance
in the preparatio
remirements but he can't really say do
this or de that. These are the things we want.
TOP SECRET
PAUL
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 10
Now as a practiced water. I think it's fair to say that
he goes pretty far in getting his way at the present time, but
on some of these requirements on a national basis, this would
give him the clear authority to ask them to do things.
Now his requirements. the level of detail and so forth,
would obviously be something that would have to be negotiated
out in the course of his work.
Now that is the recoemendation of the first paragraph
a paragraph A.
I might just say it also gives the DCI in connection with
the requirements process, it refers here to the fact that he
mav determine the success of various Agencies in fulfilling and
in fact what the caragraph sets up is a system whereby the
DCI can establish requirements and then through the budget
process and in the process of evaluating requirements make
some estimate of how well the community is doing and either add
to the budgets or take away in certain areas and so forth.
This provides some of the real system as opposed to a
paper system which he has had in the past.
Laragraph B describes the preparation of the national
intelligence budget and points-out that he should prepare this
budget, present it to the President and to the Congress who
would make some refcrore here to the language in the President's
Executive Order this
It makes the fo
waint that the definition of the
TOP SECRET
AFAUL
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 11
elements to be included within a national intelligence budget
In other words, what parts of the community would fit into that.
where you draw the line between technical and national intelli-
dence, between departmental and national intelligence.
This definition would be established by the Congress in
consultation with the Executive Branch.
It further points out that he should be involved early in
the process of preparing bulgets in the budget crcle, and then
It makes come hortatory kind of statements about how he should
try to consider trade-offs between programs and between collectio
and production and so forth.
Senator Huddleston. I would suggest there that we use
another word besides trade-off.
While it is common for us to
use it up here in committee work. I don't think it conveys the
best connotation to the public.
What we're saying is that he balances cut or apportions
resources, whatever.
Mr. Aaron.
Now I think the final sentence is this
important one, and the Sonators should note this. The proposal
is now as to who will do this, but the authority
and perhaps this ought to he made somewhat more clear than it
is clear. But the authority of the DCI to reprogram funds
within the intelligence Luidect should be limited by stacuts.
The President. t
Proantica Order gives to the Committee on
the
Porsion Tutalligence ist gute the authority to pre
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 12
national intelligence black, but to reprogram moneys within
that budget.
Now our estimate te that that budget would be on the
order of $3, 4, perhaps up to 35 billion, depending on what is
included in it, and I asked the White House, the NSC member of
that Committee what the purpose of that particular provision
was, and I asked him specifically did this mean that you would
be able to, as in the case of Angola, reprogram money away
From some. other part of the hudaet, NSA, URO. Some other major
program, and put it into the covert military, para-military
action program?
And be said ves, that is the reason that he is given
a sort of broad authority to reprogram money.
Senator Huddleston.
Well, they were doing some of that.
weren't they?
Mr. Aaron.
To some extent I believe that's true, but
I personally don't know what that extent was.
Now to the extent we will see later that we place some
or make some recommendations concerning limitations on the
authority to draw upon different funds and to replenish certain
funds for the purposes of covert action, this squares with that
proposal by saving that there should be by statute certain
limitations on the repromramming of funds.
We're not "aving bf those ought to be there really
thinking that the oscurial committee would have to work out.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 13
Now the next paranganh. C
Mr. Kirbow. Could We take these one at a time because
these are rather critical?
Mr. Chairman, one of the things that came before this
Committee when I guess it was Mr. Colby testifying and at each
meeting that Mr. Miller and the staff had with the people from
the White House and the CIA when we were preparing the oversight
bill. we heard many good reasons why we shou'd not deprive the
DCI of this ability to sian certifying out of certain funds
and being able to expend them without a great big red tape
machine to hinder that type of oneration.
If, as David.savs, his recommendation here is to prevent
reprogramming, except within very narrowly defined statutory
limits. is a first step toward restricting that further
activity. I would like to except on this and have it discussed
before the Full Committee, or in the absence of that, or
connected with it, have the record that we have that shows us
that we should restrict by legislation here
Senator Huddleston.
What is the major thrust there?
Is it to in fact limit or restrict or is it to actually have
it defined and specified in the statute as to what circumstances
might prevail?
Mr. Aaron.
The thrust here is as follows. The UCI
can now reprogram money within his own agency to some extent
OR
That budget, depending on the parts he can reprogram. I don't
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 14
believe he can reprogram to within about $750 million of his
own appropriation.
Senator Huddleston. We can't take something out of the
NSA now and put it over?
Mr. Aaron. No. we can't do that. But in his new
responsibilities as DCI for preparing the budget of the entire
national intelligence program, he will now be in a position to
reprogram the entire budget and therefore it's a much larger
kind of flexibility.
Now the thrust of this particular proposal is not really
aimed, this particular one later one we do have one which
does place some constraints and the purpose is to make it lear
where the money comes from and where it's going to go to
make it clear to the Congress at least. But this particular
one simply says that because this is a much wider reprogramming
flexibility, that it ought to be subject to certain kinds of
definitions and consider the limitations so that the Congress
knows what is happening to the monevs that it appropriates for
particular purposes.
Senator Huddleston. Well, for this particular paragraph,
would define or specify, suffice
the word limited,
or not?
Mr. Aaron.
It should be defined. That's correct.
Mr. Kirhoi
Ido wish to point out, Mr. Chawan. that
that is a departure from the standard reprogramming process that
TOP SECRET
PAUL
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 15
has been adopted in the Sheate over the last 10 or 15 vears,
for instance, with the Committee on Armed Services.
Senator Huddleston.
For other departments?
Mr. Kiroow. Where there is an authorizing and an
appropriations type action in the Congress, as Senator Hart
will know from his experience on that committee, if they wish
to reprogram missile money over to aircraft, for instance, it
has to be approved by all four of those committees, both
Arms Services and both appropriations committees with the
exact transfer of the amounts of money and the justifications
given therefore.
My concern is not that the Congress should not have a
control of this or that you could make it so rigid by making
recommendations that leave the oversight committee and the
appropriations committee no flexibility to do this. And I would
think that unless we have a very good record on this, we should
recommend that this should be a matter that the oversight
committee in its new role gives good consideration to,
Mr. Miller. The oversight committees and the appropriatior
committees would have flegibility. Every appropriations act is
a statute, after all.
Mr. Kirhow.
They certainly would unless you restrict
thom by statute.
Sonator 10
mitus ara, suggesting a statute
which the neu aversio evittee that has passed,
TOP SECRET
FUL.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 16
so far would have legislativo.authority over. So we're really
Just recommending here that in this statute they provide the
framework under which these kinds of reprogramming can be
done in view of the fact that we are extending the DCI from his
own little bailiwick to the entire intelligence community.
Mr. Kirbow. If that's the intent of the committee, I
have no reservations about it.
Senator Huddleston, I don't think the military people.
would obiect to that kind of language. They'd like to have
some definite framework for a man to reach into his budget.
Mr. Kirbow. I think all the various agencies would like
to have that kind of protection.
Senator Huddleston. Okay.
Mr. Davis. Number C. the DCI should have responsibility
to review all intelligence activities and intelligence resource
allocations, including tactical military intelligence in order
to carry out his more general responsibilities...
We've used the word "review" very carefully here. This
is not a responsibility to direct those onerations but simply
to be able to look at the whole in order to sort of balance it
out...
We're not saving that he's taking over responsibility.
from the military commanders. If you read the Executive Order
the language is differt and it says that the CPT at the
Det will not have resonsibility for tactical militaire
TOP SECRET
no PAUL
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 17
intelligence.
But then it uses the word guidance.
That is that
the DCI will provide guidance on the relationship between the
two and that is ambiguous to us and so we wanted to make sure
that the DCI would be able to look at the whole but not have
responsibility for directing the tactical military intelligence
programs.
Mr. diGenova. The original drafting of that Section C,
I think it's actually clearer than the way i''s drafted now.
The original draft says, while the DCI shall not have responsibil
for directing tactical military operations, the DCI shall have
responsibility to review all intelligence activities, et cetera.
I think the original one is better because it makes it
clearer what you are trying to say.
Mr. Kirbow. If you're going to use that for Senate.
vou have to sav tactical military intelligence operations.
Mr. diGenova.
Yes.
There's a word missing from the
original formulation.
Mr. Davis. The reason it was taken out is because it
was a negative and there was the thought that this is saying what
he does do and leaving what he doesn't do not to be said. It's
un to the Committee how you want to
Mr. digenova. But you don't want to do the same thing
the President did and leave the thing ambiguous.
Mr. Davis.
I have no-nuoblem anking that first statement.
Senator Indo
If you want to be positive you can
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 18
TOP SECRET
say while the responsibility for directing tactical military
operations resides with whoever it is the DCI still shall have
the review.
Mr. Davis. Well, review is, I think, the right word
because he's going to try to look at the whole.
Senator Huddleston.
I think Joe makes a point there
because that could lead to some misinterpretation.
Mr. Davis. Section does on to ask the Director of
Central Intelligence to establish a staff to support him in
these responsibilities and to draw a staff as widely and from
the best talent that he can.
Senator Hart. Is this another staff or is this the
staff that is in being?
Mr. Davis. This is the staff in being. ile has always
had people to help him in this role.
Senator Hart. Why do we have to authorize him to do
something he's already doing?
Mr. Davis.
We don't want him not to do that. I mean
we want him to have a special staff to carry out these
responsibilities.
Senator Huddleston
This is about the second or third
time we've referred to him having the staff.
Senator Mathing. Why don't you say maintain instead of
establish?
Sonator Harts
The if he doesn't want the staff?
NW 50955 DocId:32423509 Page 19
TOP SECRET
Mr. Davis. He's authorized. He doesn't have to.
Mr. Kirbow. He's authorized to have a staff under the
President's executive order or in any other normal course of
business.
This appears to be dirring down below the kind of
statutory authority position that you have and telling them how t
structure all of the organizations underneath.
That's my objection to that particular aspect of the
recommendation.
I kind of side with Senator Hart. He has the
authority to do his business and. I don't think anyone in their
wildest imagination would think that the Congressional record
or history in this would establish that he's suprosed to do it
by Limself.
Senator Hart. You took the words right out of my mouth.
Mr. Kirbow. And I once more say this is one of the
recommendations that we recommend be taken out.
Senator Hart.
Who's we?
Mr. Kirbow. The staff had had discussions at the staff
level where several recommendations that things like this be
taken out for that very reason be considered, and I think it
is inadvertent that they are hack in the redraft.
Senator Iluddleston
You have no strong feeling about that?
Let's omit that paragraph.
Senator Mark
To that correction and I hate to do this.
but I'd like to back to beranse Derid sailed right by this
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 20
TOP SECRET
Dang 24, recommendation 16, The Director also would be empowered
to establish a board of senior advisors.
Now who is that? Who is that board?
Mr. Davis. This would be something similar to the board
of national estimates.
Senator Hart. Is he empowered to do that now?
Mr. Aaron. He is not empowered to do that now because it
was abolished on him.
Mr. Davis. But he could do it.
Mr. Aaron. I don't think that's correct.
Mr. Maxwell. He abolished it. It was not abolished on
him.
Senator Hart. Could Mr. Bush reconstitute it if he
wants?
Mr. Bader.
Senator, this is in a way a call to the
DCI. It is based, I think, on really extensive testimony we
have taken here about the utility of the board of national
estimates.
Senator Huddleston. It may be more a recommendation than
an authorization.
Mr. Davis. At the same time we didn't want to tell him
he had to because it is more or less up to him because if he
doesn't want to run bir shop that way
Senator llast.
these people?
Mr. Davis. In they have been former senior
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 21
TOP SECRET
officials and academics who would serve to review the estimates
and comment on them for the director.
Senator Hart. Do they perform any function? Have they
in the past?
Mr. Miller. Oh, yes..
Llewelyn Thompson, for example.
There are senior diplomats. senior military men from the outside,
people of distinction, people who have seen a lot and have
something to contribute.
Sevator Hart. Have they had something to contribute?
Mr. Miller. Yes..
Mr. Aaron. There are two functions they can perform.
More or less, they can bring their wisdom to bear on the product.
Senator Hart. I want to know what they have done in
the past.
Mr. Miller. Soviet matters. Llewelyn Thompson's roles,
for example.
Mr. Aaron. And the second thing they have done was to
provide some senior support for the DCI and the judgements he
is making.
End 1A в ав
Now the extent to which that support has been translated
into borsepower is unclear. except it was sufficiently strong that
it was of concern to the previous administration and was one of
the reasons that the board and others was dis-established.
Senator
Have Hoy prevented any problems in the
east that we know ?
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 22
Mr. Inderfurth. I think that's in relation to helping
to insulate the DCI from pressures to modify him, In the
past the board of national estimates insulated the DCI
from pressures.
-Senator Ilart. Chile, Angola, all these cases where the
DCI comes in and says we don't really want to do that but the
President made us, does he bring in the senior advisor to the
President and say, Llewely Thompson doesn't want us to, either.
Mr. Lombard. I think part of the problem here. Senator,
is that the office of estimates was created under the Eisenhower
Administration and fitted very well into the formalistic way
in which foreign policy was evolved during that administration
Perhaps as a matter of fact it's been criticized as being overly
formalistic and the board of estimates was viewed as being
somewhat too long-range and somewhat other world and not
geared to what the President perceived as being his day to
dav needs on estimates.
Now I don't know where the equities lie in this thing,
but it seems as though those insitutions have changed according
to individual Presidents.
So really, beginning with the Kennedy administration,
you had the decline of the office of national estimates because
it no longer seemed to fit the fabric.
Mr. Aaron
I'm not sure that's really a fair picture
of the history of the board: Ferhaps you could tell us since
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 23
Mr. Kirbow. I want to talk about the testimony that
was given before the committee on this from two of the former
DCIS. Mr. Colby, at both the breakfast briefings he gave and
in testimony, favored the use of individual intelligence offices
around in these various agencies, originating estimates and
everything else: whereas Mr. Helms, when he testified here,
savs I really don't know how that system is working right now.
I didn't favor it when Mr. Colby established it, and I had the
other system and it worked well for me.
So I think here again you are talking about a man's
staffing requirements as they suit the particular times and
the individual as to how he wants to run the intelligence
community and what apparently suited Mr. Helms fine didn't
suit Mr. Colby and he used a different system which he says
works great. And I say that that is, again, a step down thing.
Unless you want to encourage him to do it in a recommendation
and not mandate that he do it, it kind of makes him run his
business the way you want it run and to no apparent abuse
problems or anything like that.
Senator Hart. Well, my only thought here is that some
future oversight committee or select committee is going to be
trying to pinpoint responsibility, and there are so many boards
and committees and tocks to kide behind that a DCI has or
a President or anybody has that
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 24
TOP SECRET
So again, my intent here is not to be a know-nothing.
just to keep the structure as clean as possible to identify
responsibility. That's all. And if this is important to do,
let's do it.
Mr. Bader. The record, Senator, and I can only speak
from personal experience with the board of national estimates
I certainly know of at least four estimates with which I had
a part of which the board's role was very important in shielding
both the PCI and indeed the analyst from the ravages in two
cases of the military who felt very strongly that the
continuation of our bases in the Azores was much more important
than sav some hard political realities about the future of
Portugese Africa.
And I could cite other cases where this kind of
insulating function was enormously important. It had a great
deal to do with the experience. the background and the very
presence of some of these board members.
They also play a rols as the chairman of the coordinating
sessions of these national estimates. There's not just an
advisory board that sits culte far from the process. Each
national intelligence estimate one of these board members
becomes the chairman.
So they do play a very active role in the preparation.
Mr. Aaron.
The option that in this connection your
concern about the au!by problem. which I think is a
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 25
fair one, we have testirope that Helms' disposition on this
was very clear. When he signed the estimate it was his estimate
and it really wasn't the board's estimate.
Mr. Maxwell. Perhaps it might be useful because I think
it is clear that he is empowered to do it. Two, if the
committee desires to make clear that as a recommendation, on
the basis of the committee's examination of their record that
this is a desirable thing rather than saving that it would be
empowered, by statute, because he does have that nower.
Mr. Kirhow. Is it the desire of the Committee though,
to change the current system which the present director has
not seen fit to change vet, which he has full authority to
change if he wishes to do so and which the previous DCI
established and developed into a working mechanism?
Mr. Miller.
The records show that the furction of
the board had been official results. Then it seems to me we
should so state that it is a desirable structure.
Mr. Kirbow. I had one difference with Bill. I don't
know that it is desirable to insulate the DCI from the opinions
of the respective military departments if they have a vested
interest in the outcome of the decision being rendered.
Mr. Miller.
The heard has distinguished members from
the militerv.
Mr. Firb
o't know how it can be used to
isolate.
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423509 Page 26
Mr. Miller. Insulate the political pressure. That's
the point. Not the point of view of opinion.
Senator Hart. Mr. Chairman, I move that this paragraph
stay in. that we move on.
Senator iluddleston.
Yos. I think we discussed that
thoroughly yesterday, as a matter of fact.
