157-10014-10144
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10144
RECORD SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-49
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM: 
TO: 
TITLE: 
DATE: 00/00/1976
PAGES: 263
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: Secret
RESTRICTIONS: Consulted
CURRENT STATUS: Withhold
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 01/05/1999
OPENING CRITERIA: 
COMMENTS: 
v9.1
1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10144
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-49
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM : 
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TO: 
TITLE : 
DATE: 00/00/76
PAGES: 263
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA : 
COMMENTS: 
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 2
SECRET SENSITIVE
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PROPRIETARIES
I. Introduction and Philosophy of Use
A. Operating Proprietaries
B. Non-Operating Proprietaries
Statutory Authority for Proprietaries
1
3
7
9
II.
III. Specific Controls
A. Agency Regulations and Policies
B. Project Reviews and Control
C. Financial Controls/Operating Companies and Non-
Operating Companies Keeping Books of Accounts
D. Financial Controls/Non-Operating Companies Except
Those Keeping Books of Accounts
E. Treatment of Profits
F. Disposition of Funds Returned from Proprietaries
G. Disposal of Proprietaries
H. Relations with Tax, Regulatory, and Other Agencies
10
10
11
11
13
14
16
16
18
IV. A Description of the Various Proprietaries
21
Proprietary List
24
Employees of Proprietaries as of October 1975
41
Funding and Payroll Mechanisms
42
Description of Major Headquarters-Controlled
Proprietaries as of September 1975
43
Listing of Proprietaries During the Period 1952 through
1974 (Total 399)
46
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 4
(ii)
V. The Disposal of Agency Proprietaries
a. An Overview
Entities Dissolved
Entities Sold
Entities "Otherwise Disposed Of"
Description of Disposition of Entities Sold or
Otherwise Disposed Of
b. The Sale of SouthernAir Transport, Inc.: A Case
Study In Disposal of a CIA Proprietary
Background
The Sale
Declassification of Relationship With CIA
Conflict Of Interest
Conclusion
VI. Project MHBOUND
VII. Beyond "Doing Business": Peak Non-Government Security
Investments by Proprietaries Active as of December
31, 1974
VII. MHMUTUAL: The Insurance-Investment Complex
a. A Brief History
b. Current Status
Stock Portfolio Performance Chart
IX. The Air Proprietaries
X. Issues Posed, Conclusions, and Recommendations
59
59
63
68
71
74
89-1
89-1
89-4
89-14
89-15
89-17
90
95
99
99
106
108
113
129
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 5
SECRET
PROPRIETARIES P SEMOTIVE
I. INTRODUCTION AND PHILOSOPHY OF USE
Questions have arisen as to CIA's use of proprietary mechanisms
to help carry out the Agency's missions. In particular, concerns
have been expressed about the Agency's financial and management control
over these entities and about the treatment of funds related to such
entities. A careful review of these entities has revealed that CIA's
proprietaries are appropriately limited and controlled with careful
consideration given to their use within the spirit and letter of the
law.
Proprietaries fall into two main categories:
1. Operating companies that actually do business as
would any private firm; and
2. Non-operating companies or entities that appear to
do business under commercial guise.
These entities may be legally constituted as corporations, partner-
ships, or sole proprietorships; or they may have no such legal standing,
i.e., they may be "notional" entities which have bank accounts and
backstopped addresses controlled by the Agency. Corporate proprietaries
are incorporated in accordance with the statutory provisions of the
jurisdiction of incorporation, are subject to the same review as any
corporate entity within that jurisdiction, file applicable state and/or
federal tax returns, and obtain the necessary licenses to conduct their
normal business. The purposes served by them are two-fold: they provide
cover, attribution for funding, and administrative assistance to agents
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 6
- 2 -
and covert activities; and they provide services not securely available
through normal commercial facilities. Because these instrumentalities
are established as private organizations, they must be established
and managed, to the extent possible, in accordance with practice and
requirements that are normal for the types of enterprises they give
the appearance of being.
Of the legally constituted entities, the Agency uses the corporate
form in most cases because of the advantages and flexibility of corporate
management control. These corporations are legally organized under the
laws of a state, country, or other jurisdiction and are either wholly
owned by CIA or controlled through majority stock ownership. Services
of bona fide businessmen are enlisted as nominee officers, directors,
and stockholders.
The Agency generally has employed proprietaries when it was the
only way, or clearly the best way, to achieve an approved objective.
Under Agency rules proprietaries are established or allowed to continue
in existence only so long as they contribute to accomplishment of the
Agency's mission and remain the most advantageous operational means of
achieving certain particular and necessary objectives. Current policy
calls for limited use of operating proprietary mechanisms. The capa-
bility to use the mechanism is to be retained (this the Agency terms
its "capability in being"), and smaller entities used.
A review of Agency files shows that the number of operating
proprietaries has been consciously pared by about 50 percent since the
mid 1960's. These reductions began as a result both of the Katzenbach
guidelines associated with the National Student Association affair in
1967 and the CIA's own IG survey in that same year. In addition, the
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 7
- 3 -
need for proprietaries has declined as a result of a general shift in
emphasis away from covert action; transfer of Radio Free Europe and
Radio Liberty to the Board of International Broadcasting with funding
through State Department; continuing liquidation of the assets of the
Air America complex as requirements for CIA support in Southeast Asia
have diminished; the sale of Southern Air Transport and the continuing
liquidation of assets of Intermountain Aviation with their exposure
in the press and the decreased need for contingency air capabilities.
The evidence establishes that activities of all proprietaries,
directly or indirectly, support the Agency's foreign intelligence collectio:
or covert action missions. Some of these proprietaries are located
within the United States for reasons of operational or administrative
necessity, but their ultimate impact is overseas. Some of the question-
able domestic uses of these entities is dealt with in the sections of
the Report on "Chaos" and related programs. And in one area, MHMUTUAL,
serious questions remain as to the propriety of using such a mechanism
to provide insurance and retirement benefits. This problem is detailed
later. (See Section VIII).
A. Operating Proprietaries
As discussed in greater detail later, operating proprietaries
conduct business in the commercial sphere, but they are not in direct
competition with privately owned corporations to such a degree as to
deprive the private companies of legitimate income. There is no doubt,
however, that they were and are in competition. The Agency has been
careful to limit the amount of commercial business engaged in by these
proprietaries to only that necessary to support the viability of the
commercial cover and keep it alive in the commercial world. Revenues
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 8
- 4 -
have been used as partial offsets to operating costs. Aggregate
profits over the years have been relatively small. Only two proprie-
taries have shown significant profits: the Air America complex in
fulfilling mostly Government contracts in Southeast Asia, and the
insurance company handling trust funds and insurance (MHMUTUAL).
The air proprietary overview, infra Section IX, details the dilemmas
posed by size. Moreover, it sheds light on questions concerning
whether commercial viability became more of a bronze god than was
necessary to maintain adequate cover.
Operating proprietaries may be large or small in terms of capital-
ization and total assets, depending upon the functions they perform.
When the commercial purpose of an operating proprietary is incidental
to its CIA mission -- such as an export-import firm which engages in
commercial operations only to the extent necessary to provide cover
for a CIA officer in a foreign country -- a minimum capitalization,
usually in the neighborhood of $25,000 or less, is all that is required.
Examples of an operating proprietary in which commercial operations
are incidental to the Agency mission are:
A United States frozen seafood importing company which
operates in the Far East and provides cover for an Agency
employee engaged in intelligence activities. The Agency
provided $25,000 in capital to purchase and activate a
dormant but long-established privately-owned United States
seafood distributing company. The former owner and his
partner, who are cleared and witting, provide training,
business management, and product distribution in the
United States for one-half the profits on seafood imports
financed by the proprietary. The Agency subsequently
provided $10,000 annually for fiscal years 1972, 1973, and
1974 as working capital. The proprietary since 1971 has
provided excellent cover with a minimum amount of business.
As of 20 June 1974, the proprietary had assets of $104,222.67
and a net worth (assets minus liabilities) of $74,051.15.
The company's financial accounts are handled by an Agency
proprietary management firm.
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 9
- 5 -
A foreign travel service company which operates in a Southeast
Asia country and provides cover for an agent targeted against
the local Communist Party. The company was established in 1973
with an initial investment of $5,900.
Operating proprietaries whose commercial purposes are in themselves
essential to the CIA mission require much larger capitalization and
investment. They are staffed by Agency personnel plus cleared commer-
cial employees as required. Among the Agency's operating proprietaries
of this type are four management companies which provide commercial
assistance to other proprietaries and an audit firm which conducts
commercial audits of operating companies and those non-operating
proprietaries with substantial assets. The Agency's largest operating
proprietaries are Air America, an insurance complex, and the aviation
facility, Intermountain Aviation, Inc. The assets of Intermountain
have been sold, with operations ceasing on 28 February 1975, and the
corporation is in the process of being dissolved.
Air America, the Agency's largest proprietary, which is in the
process of liquidation, provided aircraft in support of Agency operations
in Southeast Asia. This support has been under cover of a commercial
flying service in fulfillment of U.S. Government contracts. Corporate
Headquarters has been in Washington, D. C., with field Headquarters
in Taipei, Taiwan.
The insurance complex provides a mechanism for the payment of
annuities and other benefits to sensitive agents and for self-insurance
of risks involved in covert operations which, for security reasons,
cannot be attributed to the U.S. Government or handled through private
firms. The complex was formed in 1962 as a clandestine commercial
support mechanism to provide death and disability benefits to agents
or their beneficiaries when security considerations precluded payments
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 10
- 6 -
attributable to the U.S. Government. This function was broadened
to include self-insurance for many risks involved in covert operations,
including property risks incurred by operational activities of Agency-
owned air and marine companies. From an early date, the complex has
administered agents' escrow accounts and life insurance, and provided
annuity and pension programs for selected agent personnel employed by
the Agency. These programs are solely for the purpose of meeting the
Agency's obligations to agent-type personnel who have rendered services
over a substantial period of time and cannot be handled under normal
U.S. Government retirement programs. Individuals who qualify for the
CIA Retirement System or the Civil Service System are not handled
through the proprietary system. In addition, the complex has been
used to provide a limited amount of support to covert operations --
specifically, for the acquisition of operational real estate and as
a conduit for the funding of selected covert activities.
Intermountain Aviation, Inc., has the purpose of providing a
variety of nonattributable air support capabilities available for
quick deployment overseas to support Agency activities. The Agency
is in the process of disposing of its assets and terminating this
activity.
As of 1 July 1974 there were 71 operating proprietary companies,
of which 21 are part of the Agency's proprietary insurance complex.
The combined net worth (assets minus liabilities) of these companies
is approximately $57.3 million. Although some, such as those in the
insurance complex, are commercially self-supporting, most operating
proprietaries usually require budgetary support.
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 11
- 7 -
B. Nonoperating Proprietaries
Nonoperating proprietaries vary in complexity according to their
Agency task, are, for the most part, either corporate shells or less
that facilitate foreign operations, and clearly pose no competitive
threat to bona fide businesses. The most elaborate are legally
licensed and established to conduct bona fide business. They have
nominee stockholders, directors, and officers and are generally
directed by one of four Agency proprietary management companies.
The company address may be a Post Office Box, a legitimate address
provided by a cleared and witting company official or attorney, or in
a few cases the address of a proprietary management company. They
maintain bank accounts, generate business correspondence, keep books
of account which can withstand commercial and tax audit, file State
and Federal tax returns, and perform normal business reporting to
regulatory authorities in order to backstop fully their Agency tasks.
They are moderately capitalized, generally around $5,000, and their
net worth at any one time varies according to the Agency task they
are performing. As of 31 December 1973, 38 of these companies had
a combined net worth of approximately $325,000. Of this amount,
almost $200,000 was operating capital for three companies which
provide cover for several Agency personnel. Examples of two non-
operating companies which are commercially managed, keep books of
account, and can withstand commercial and tax audit are:
A Florida corporation capitalized at $7,000 and whose legal
address is the office of a cleared and witting attorney.
Under the auspices of the Florida corporation, an Agency
officer established a branch office in a Central American
country and conducts a sporting goods business which provides
him cover. Administration of the corporation, including
purchase of inventory for the branch office, is handled by
a proprietary management company.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 12
- 8 -
A Liechtenstein Anstalt which an Agency nominee established
using a reliable but nonwitting Liechtenstein lawyer as a
resident agent. The Anstalt was used to purchase a property
in a European country from which an audio operation was
mounted against an installation of a Communist country.
Upon conclusion of the operation, the property will be sold
by the Anstalt and the proceeds returned to CIA via its
nominee.
Requiring less elaborate commercial administration because of
the nature of Agency tasks performed are 31 legally incorporated
companies which are directly managed by Agency Headquarters specialists
operating in alias as signatories to the company bank accounts. Each
of these companies generally have a capitalization of $5,000 or less
and are domiciled in the offices of cleared and witting attorneys.
No commercial books of account are kept, and in the event of a tax
audit the Agency has to brief the auditing authority. Depending on
use, administration may be as simple as maintaining bank accounts and
filing annual franchise taxes or more extensive as required when
obtaining Employee Identification numbers, paying personnel, with-
holding taxes and Social Security, and filing tax returns. Examples
of this type of Headquarters-managed proprietary corporation are:
A Nevada proprietary corporation domiciled at the offices of
a California law form. Three members of the firm serve as
Agency nominee stockholders, directors, and officers for
the proprietary which holds title to two aircraft used by
the Agency for flight training and testing avionics equipment.
In this case, only administration is required to maintain a
bank account, file a franchise tax, and coordinate with the
law firm.
Although not proprietary corporations, but proprietaries in the
sense of being Agency-owned and administered, are 64 ostensible sole-
proprietorships. The Agency establishes and registers these sole-
proprietorships in the name of fictitious persons and opens a bank
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 13
- 9 -
account on which Agency officers in alias have signatory power.
Arrangements are made with cleared and witting businessmen to
provide a domiciliary address for these entities at a law office
or telephone answering service. These entities, like the proprietary
corporation administered by Agency Headquarters specialists, provide
cover, payrolling, and tax attribution for Agency personnel and are
similarly administered.
Another type of entity used by the Agency and a proprietary
only in the sense of being Agency-owned and administered is exempli-
fied by some 215 notional companies which are not legally registered
but have names and bank accounts controlled by the Agency. The Agency
arranges with cleared and witting attorneys or proprietors of telephone
answering services to provide a domiciliary address and to refer any
queries to the Agency specialists concerned. These notional entities
are used to provide status and operational cover for Agency personnel
involved in all types of high-risk intelligence operations. They are
also used as ostensible clients for purposes of funding Agency pro-
prietaries or bona fide American companies which provide
cover and payrolling of Agency personnel.
II. STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR PROPRIETARIES
The Agency's statutory authority to spend money for proprietary
corporations in support of Agency operations derives from Section 8(b)
of the CIA Act of 1949. This Act states:
"The sums made available to the Agency may be expended without
regard to the provisions of law and regulations relating to
the expenditure of Government funds; and for objects of a
confidential, extraordinary, or emergency nature, such
expenditures to be accounted for solely on the certificate
of the Director and every such certificate shall be deemed
a sufficient voucher for the amount therein certified."
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 14
- 10 -
The language contained in Section 8(b) is adequate authority to
exclude the operation of these proprietary corporations from the
law governing Government corporations in 31 U.S.C.A. 841 et. seq.
However, the CIA General Counsel ruled in 1958 that the CIA should
comply with the principles in that Act to the extent possible, and
this has been done. Attached as Appendix A is a classified Memorandum
of Law by the Agency's Office of General Counsel on CIA's authority to
acquire and dispose of a proprietary without regard to provisions of
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act, which position
was upheld by the U.S. District Court in the Southern District of
Florida in dismissing the suit Farmer vs. Southern Air Transport on
17 July 1974.
III. SPECIFIC CONTROLS
The formation and activities of proprietaries are controlled
through various mechanisms to assure their proper use, as discussed
below.
A. Agency Regulations and Policies
Headquarters Regulation 230-8 and Headquarters Handbook 230-1
prescribe the administrative procedures to be followed in the estab-
lishment, operation, and liquidation of proprietaries (see Appendix B).
An Administrative Plan (specifying the operational purpose, admini-
strative and management procedures, and cost) and a Liquidation Plan
(specifying details of liquidation and disposition of funds when
liquidation is contemplated) must both be coordinated among components
concerned and approved at appropriate management levels. This regu-
latory control along with policy memoranda are intended to assure
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 15
- 11 -
proper conduct by entities. Each Agency component involved is
responsible for compliance, and the Chief of the Cover and Commercial
Staff, the Director of Finance, and the Comptroller are particularly
watchful in their areas of concern.
B. Project Reviews and Control
The controls and procedures applicable to each operating proprie-
tary are specified in a project outline and administrative plan
approved at the Deputy Director level. Normal control and administra-
tion is carried out by a project officer at Headquarters. Semi-annual
reviews are conducted to determine whether or not the operational
need still exists, and regular audits are performed to assure proper
management and financial accountability. Proprietaries are liquidated
as their usefulness ends; new ones are formed as needed.
C. Financial Controls/Operating Companies and Non-Operating
Companies Keeping Books of Accounts
Under Agency regulations, these proprietaries are established
and managed to appear to be consistent with normal commercial practices
and requirements of the type of enterprise concerned. Specific require-
ments for the general management and financial controls of each such
proprietary are provided in the administrative plan described above
which specifies the basic framework within which the instrumentality
is to operate. All facets of an administrative plan relating to
funding the proprietary and its financial management are subject to
the concurrence of designated representatives of the Director of
Finance and the Comptroller. A primary purpose of this coordination
is to assure that the financial controls and procedures prescribed
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 16
- 12 -
for the proprietary are compatible and consistent with normal practices
and requirements for the type of instrumentality being established.
The Director of Finance representative is the Chief of the Commercial
Systems and Audit Division, a position normally occupied by a certi-
fied public accountant.
The initial and all subsequent passages of funds to such proprie-
taries are from the current year Agency operating budget. Receipts
of funds by the proprietary are documented as appropriate ostensibly
to appear to be from a source usual to a commercial enterprise of
similar type, e.g., capital stock, paid in capital, income from
ostensible sales, etc.
The Agency treats all disbursements to such proprietaries as
current year budgetary expenditures and concurrently establishes as
a control mechanism a fully reserved investment account which is
reconciled periodically to reported net worth of the proprietary as
reflected in required financial statements received from each proprie-
tary. Each such statement is reviewed to reconcile the approved
financial activity of the proprietary to reported changes in net
worth before adjusting the Agency investment account to conform with
the reported net worth.
All control documents evidencing Agency equity or interest in
the proprietary, e.g., executed stock certificates, irrevocable stock
powers, declaration of trust, etc., are held in safekeeping by the
Commercial Systems and Audit Division/OF provided that when such
documents need to be retained by the proprietary, a report will be
made to identify the documents retained, location, name of custodian and
reason for the retention, and copies of the documents, if appropriate.
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 17
- 13 -
The Chief of the Agency Audit Staff is responsible for the audit
of Agency proprietaries, utilizing Audit Staff personnel under a
suitable cover arrangement or witting or unwitting public accounting
firms as is most appropriate to the requirements of a particular
proprietary. An example of the type of audit conducted appears at p. 105
Section VIIIand concerns MHMUTUAL, the proprietary insurance-investment
complex.
D. Financial Controls/Non-Operating Companies Except Those
Keeping Books of Account
Entities in this category are financed if financing is required
through the establishment of bank checking accounts on which Agency
officers have signatory power in alias. All such accounts are maintained
in the accounting records of the Agency as current asset accounts
subject to monthly reconciliation with statements of accounts issued
by the depository banks.
All passages of funds to these accounts add to the accountable
balance of the accounts. No income is produced by these activities.
All disbursements from these accounts are charged as current expendi-
tures in liquidation of obligations of the operational activity on
behalf of which the entity was established.
Signatories are Agency officials who in each case execute a
declaration of trust acknowledging Government ownership of the account.
Payments are initiated only in response to request of an authorized
official responsible for the operational activity for which the
entity was established.
The Chief of the Agency's Audit Staff is responsible for the
audit of all accounts maintained for these entities.
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 18
- 14 -
Balances of each of these accounts are monitored periodically
to assure that balances do not exceed a level warranted by the activity
for which the respective account was established. Balances excess
to current requirements and balances for entities which are dissolved
are returned to the Agency and in turn remitted to the U.S. Treasury
as Miscellaneous Receipts. (See discussion of Disposition of Funds
Returned from Proprietaries on p. 16.)
E. Treatment of Profits
The CIA General Counsel, in a 6 January 1958 memorandum, ruled
that "income of proprietaries, including profits, need not be considered
miscellaneous receipts to be covered into the Treasury but may be
used for proper corporate or company purposes." This subject was
reviewed and the opinion reaffirmed by the General Counsel in July
1965. The policy of retaining profits has continued, although as
already noted only a very few of Agency proprietaries have ever been
profitable. The CIA's legal basis for retaining profits for the use
of the operating corporate entities is discussed below.
Section 104 of the Government Corporations Control Act, 31 U.S.C.
849, provides that Congress shall enact necessary legislation to make
available for expenditure such corporate funds or other financial
resources or limiting the use thereof as the Congress may determine.
It is further provided that "this section shall not be construed as
preventing the Government corporations from carrying out and financing
their activities as authorized by existing law..." The legislative
history explaining this section of the act states that "in cases where
no other law required a congressional authorization of expenditures,
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 19
- 15 -
the corporation, if it had means of financing other than annual appro-
priations, could continue to operate in the absence of any action by
Congress on its budget program." The statute creating a particular
Government corporation may provide specifically that the corporation
may use its profits in the conduct of its business.
The Government Corporations Control Act certainly did not contem-
plate Government corporations in the sense that the Agency must have
them. Neither is it feasible for Agency proprietaries to be created
by act of Congress or overseen precisely as provided for in the normal
Government corporation in the Act. Nevertheless, the Agency has felt
that the appropriate and reasonable policy would be to treat and control
them insofar as possible in accordance with the terms of that law.
Such being the case, the Agency believes there is no need to have more
restrictive rules applied to its corporations in the use of funds,
including profits, than are applied to Government Corporations under
the other Act or statutes. Thus, the use by a proprietary of its
earnings to carry on its corporate affairs without an offset against
Agency appropriations is considered a legitimate practice and does not
constitute an illegal augmentation of appropriations.
With rare exception, principally the large air and insurance
proprietaries, operating proprietaries have not been self-sustaining
from bona fide income. Such income, including profits, as is received
is retained by the proprietaries consistent with the usual operating
practices of business enterprises.
The use of proprietaries' profits, however, is controlled by
annual reviews and audits within the Agency of the total capital,
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 20
- 16 -
investment, and profits situations of the corporations in the context
of the operational objectives and the cover needs of the corporations.
In effect the annual project review is based upon an audit as searching
as that required for statutory Government corporations.
F. Disposition of Funds Returned from Proprietaries
Any proprietary with funds excess to its current or foreseeable
needs is required to return such funds to the Agency. Also, all funds
realized from the liquidation or termination of a proprietary are
returned to the Agency except in a limited number of situations when
transferred to another proprietary for "similar use." On the basis
of an opinion of 3 February 1975 by the CIA General Counsel, the Agency
has revised its policy for the treatment of all returns of funds from
proprietaries; all such returns are to be remitted to the U.S. Treasury
as Miscellaneous Receipts. Prior to this change in policy, returns
had been treated as refunds of the previously recorded expenses up to
the amount of such expense for a particular proprietary with any excess
amounts returned to the Treasury as Miscellaneous Receipts.(Appendix C)
G. Disposal of Proprietaries
Air America, the Agency's largest proprietary, at its peak had
total assets of some $50 million and more than 8,000 employees (who
accounted for more than 90 percent of the people employed directly
by all proprietaries). It is in the process of being liquidated
because it is no longer required. The Air America complex included
a number of other companies with the Pacific Corporation as the holding
company. The general plan for liquidation of Air America is for the
Pacific Corporation to sell off Air America, Inc. and Air Asia, Ltd.
(the Taipei maintenance operation). A private New York firm (R. Dixon
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 21
- 17 -
Speas Company) was engaged to estimate a fair market value for the
complex. Although an intensive search for competitive bidders was
made, the Agency was unable to find buyers for any of the affiliated
companies except the Taipei maintenance facility. The sale of this
company as a going concern to the successful bidder was closed on
31 January 1975. The remaining parts of Air America are being
liquidated by sale of individual assets upon completion of existing
contracts. Funds realized from the sales could be as much as $25 million
and will be returned to the Treasury.
Agency financial support for Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe,
both sizeable proprietaries, was terminated in FY 1971 and responsi-
bility for their funding and operation was assumed by the Department
of State.
Southern Air Transport was sold on 31 December 1973 because its
contingency capability was no longer needed. The Agency realized
$6,470,000 from this sale. Cash received was $3,345,000 which included
a $1.2 million award in arbitration of a dispute over the proceeds of
the sale of an aircraft by Southern Air Transport after the sale of
the company by the Agency. The balance was paid by the purchaser to
Air America to retire a debt owed by Southern Air Transport. A group
of employees of Southern Air Transport filed a civil action disputing
the propriety of the sale of the company by the Agency, but the case was
dismissed with prejudice on 17 July 1974.
A more detailed list of various disposals of smaller proprietaries
and what, if any, relationships remained thereafter between the Agency
and any subsequent entity appears infra page 39, Section V.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423532 Page 22
- 18 -
H. Relations with Tax, Regulatory, and Other Agencies
Management and control of proprietaries often requires "cooperative
interface" with outside agencies to gain beneficial working relation-
ships and, as necessary, any appropriate authorizations. These
relationships are described below.
For those proprietaries which maintain commercial books and other
financial records. U.S. and State tax returns are prepared annually by
commercial managers based on the corporation's financial records. For
other entities where only internal Agency records are maintained, tax
returns are prepared by Agency specialists in a manner to reflect the
normal operations of a bona fide commercial business. Close coordination
is maintained with the Internal Revenue Service, which is aware of the
Agency's use of proprietary commercial entities. In the event an Agency
entity is singled out for IRS audit, it has been agreed that the Agency,
through the Office of General Counsel, will notify IRS of Agency
ownership. The IRS then cancels the audit in order to conserve auditor
manpower.
The Air proprietaries necessitated contact with the Civil Aeronautics
Board, the Federal Aviation Agency and the National Transportation
Safety Board. Specific problems were discussed, usually with the
Office of General Counsel of the agency concerned by the CIA General
Counsel.
The Air Proprietaries dealt with State Department and the Agency
for International Development, generally on a contractor/customer basis,
although senior personnel of those agencies were advised by the Agency
of its ownership of the companies.
NW 50955 DocId:32423532 Page 23
- 19 -
Those proprietaries which engaged in the shipment of weapons
or other items on the Munitions Control list required Agency assistance
in obtaining the necessary export licenses. The ownership of the
companies was discussed with State Department Office of Munitions
Control and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tax and Firearms.
The radio proprietaries, while funded by CIA, did receive policy
guidance from the Department of State to ensure that their broadcasts
were in conformance with U.S. foreign policy.
The Agency has intervened with the Department of Labor on behalf
of survivors of employees of the proprietaries in order to assist
them in receiving the available benefits under the applicable Workmen's
Compensation Acts.
The Agency, on behalf of the proprietaries, interceded with the
Defense Department to have the proprietaries' contracts exempt from the
Renegotiation Board. There was a normal exemption based on the rules
of the Board which was given for contracts performed entirely outside
the United States.
CIA requested the Air Force to consider the interest of the Agency
in connection with the awarding of commercial contracts to its proprie-
taries. Initially this was done in the mid-1950's on the basis of a
policy decision by the Operations Coordination Board that the air
proprietary in the Far East, then operating at a deficit, was an
instrument of value to national security. The Agency was able to
maintain a standby capability without budget subsidies if awarded
enough business to support large commercial aircraft. This applied to
the passenger and cargo aircraft.
NW 50955 DocId:3