157-10014-10137
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Assassination system
Identification Form
Agency Information
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10137
RECORD SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-43
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM:
ΤΟ:
TITLE: DRAFT REPORT
DATE: 09/08/1975
PAGES: 207
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: IB; IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 04/05/2000
OPENING CRITERIA:
COMMENTS: CCBOX 349
Date: 111/2013
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10137
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-43
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
FROM:
TO:
TITLE: DRAFT REPORT
DATE: 09/08/75
PAGES: 207
SUBJECTS SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 01/05/99
OPENING CRITERIA:
COMMENTS: CCBOX 349
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
(Draft--9/8/75)
Box 349
The "Executive Action" Capability
Along with the question of authorization for actual assas-
sination attempts, the Committee considered the extent and nature
of authorization for a CIA project which included, as one element,
the development of an assassination capability.
(a) Introduction
Sometime in early 1961, Richard Bissell (Deputy Director
of Plans) instructed William Harvey, who was at that time the
Chief of one of CIA's Foreign Intelligence staffs, to establish
an "executive action capability" which included research into a
capability to assassinate foreign leaders. (Bissell 6/9/75, p. 51;
Harvey. 6/25/75, pp. 36-37.) At some time within the same period,
Bissell and McGeorge Bundy (Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs) had a conversation about the matter.
Bissell, Harvey and Helms all agreed that the "generalized"
capability was never used" (Bissell 6/9/75, p. 87; Harvey 6/25/75,
p. 45; Helms 6/13/75, p. 52).
"Executive action" is a CIA euphemism, defined by the
testimony before the Committee as a project for research into
developing means for overthrowing foreign political leaders, includ-
ing a "capability to perform assassinations". (Harvey 6/25/75,
p. 34.) Bissell indicated that executive action covered a "wide
spectrum of actions" to "eliminate the effectiveness" of foreign
leaders, with assassination as the "most extreme" action on the
spectrum (Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 32). The Inspector General's Report
-2-
described executive action as a "general stand-by capability" to
carry out assassination when required (I.G., p. 37). The project
was given the code name 'ZR/RIFLE by the CIA.*
A single agent ("asset"), given the cryptonym QJ/WIN,
was placed under Harvey's supervision for the ZR/RIFLE project,
but never used in connection with any actual assassination efforts.
Richard Helms described. QJ/WIN's "capability":
"If you needed somebody to carry out murder, I guess you
had a man who might be prepared to carry it out." (Helms,
6/13/75, p. 53).
Harvey did use agent QJ/WIN, however, to spot "individuals
with criminal and underworld connections in Europe for possible
multi-purpose use" (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 50). For example, QJ/WIN;
reported that a potential asset in the Middle East was "the leader
of a gambling syndicate" with "an available pool of assassins"
(CIA file, ZR/RIFLE/Personality Sketches).
However, Harvey testified that:
"during the entire existence of the entire ZRRIFLE project
no agent was recruited for the purpose of assassina-
tion, and no even tentative targeting or target list was
ever drawn." (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 45.)
Project ZR/RIFLE involved, generally, assessing the
problems and requirements of assassination and developing a stand-
* ZR/RIFLE was a cryptonym relating to two programs. One was.
the executive action assassination capability. The other was
another program which is not part of the subject matter of this
report: (William Harvey had been in charge of the CIA section
with general responsibility for such programs.) This second
program was genuine, but it was also to provide a cover for any
executive action operation. (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 49.)
-3-
by assassination capability; more specifically, it involved.
"spotting" potential agents and "researching" assassination:
techniques that might be used (Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 11 and 6/9/75,
p. 73; Harvey, 6/25/75, pp. 37-A, 45). Bissell characterized
Project ZR/RIFLE as "internal and purely preparatory" (Bissell,
7/22/75, p. 32). The I.G. Report of 1967 found "no indication
in the file that the Executive Action Capability of ZR/RIFLE-
QJ/WIN was ever used", but said that "after Harvey took over the
Castro operation, he ran it as one aspect of ZR/RIFLE". (I.G.
pp. 40-41.)*
(b) The Question of White House Initiation, Authorization,
or Knowledge of the Executive Action Project
There is general agreement on one fact: at some point in
early 1961 Bissell discussed the executive action capability with
Bundy. The timing of that conversation and whether "the White
House" urged that a capability be created were matters on which
the evidence varied widely.
Harvey testified that Bissell had told him that "the
White House" had twice urged the creation of such a capability
and the Inspector General's Report quoted notes of Harvey's (no
longer in existence) to that effect. Bissell did not recall any
specific conversation with the "White House". However, his initial
testimony assumed the correctness of Harvey's notes, and stated
* A discussion of whether ZR/RIFLE was related to the actuar
assassination efforts against Castro is found at Section (d),
infra.
-4-
that, while he could have created the capability on his own, any
urgings would have come from Bundy or Walt Rostow. In a later
appearance, however, Bissell said he merely informed Bundy of
the capability and that the context was a briefing by him and
not urging by Bundy. Bundy said he received a briefing and
gave no urging, though he raised no objections. Rostow said he
never heard of the project.
William Harvey testified that he was "almost certain"
that on January 25 and 26, 1961, he met with CIA officials Sidney
Gottlieb, the new Chief of CIA's Technical Services Division, and
Arnold Silver, a CIA recruiting officer, to discuss the feasibility
of creating a capability within the Agency for "executive action":
(Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 52). After reviewing his notes of those
meetings,* Harvey testified that they took place after his initial
* As to the date of these notes, Harvey was asked whether his no-
tations "25/1-Sid G" and "26/1-AS" indicate that he spoke to Sidney
Gottlieb and Arnold Silver in 1961, as opposed to 1962. Harvey testi-
fied as follows:
Q: And is it your judgment that that is January 26, 1961 and
is about the subject of Executive Action?
Harvey: Yes, it is.
Q: And it followed your conversation with Mr. Bissell that
you have recounted?
Harvey: [W]ell, when I first looked at this, I thought
this, well, this has got to be '62, but I am almost certain
now that it is not. If this is true, this might place the
first discussion that I had with Dick Bissell in early
January and this is difficult to pinpoint because there were
several such discussions in varying degrees of detail during
the period in the spring, and very early in '61 to the fall
of '61 period, but I did find out fairly early on that Silver
-5-
discussion of executive action with Bissell, which, he said,
might have transpired in "early January" (Harvey, 6/25/75, p.
52). When Bissell was shown these notes, he agreed with Harvey
about the timing of their initial discussion (Bissell, 7/17/75,
p. 10).
had -- or that Bissell had discussed the question of assassi-
nation with Arnold Silver, and this discussion, at the very
least, had to take place after I know Bissell already had
discussed the matter with Silver. (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 52).
Harvey had also testified that, after receiving Bissell's initial in-
structions to establish an executive action capability:
the first thing I did was discuss in theoretical,
terms with a few officers whom I trusted quite implicitly
the whole subject of assassination, our possible assets;
our posture, going back, if you will, even to the funda-
mental questions of A, is assassination a proper weapon
of an American intelligence service, and B, even if you
assume that it is, is it within our capability within
the framework of this government to do it effectively
and properly, securely and discreetly. (Harvey, 6/25/75,
pp. 37-A, 38).
The Inspector General's Report connected Silver and Gottlieb to the
early stages of the executive action project as follows:
Harvey says that Bissell had already discussed certain
aspects of the problem with Arnold Silver and with Sidney
Gottlieb. Since Silver was already cut in, llarvey used
him in developing the Executive Action Capability....
Harvey's mention of him [Gottlieb) in this connection
may explain a notation by Dr. Gunn that Harvey instructed
Gunn to discuss techniques with Gottlieb without associa-
ting the discussion with the Castro operation. (I.G.
Report, pp. 37-38).
It is evident from the testimony of Harvey and Bissell that the turn-
over to Harvey of the Roselli contact in November 1961 was discussed
as part of ZRRIFLE (see Section (d), infra). Thus, their initial
discussion of executive action can, at the least, be dated before
November 1961 and the "25/1" and "26/1" notations would have to
refer to January 1961.
-6-
Harvey testified that the "executive action" capability.
was intended to include assassinations (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 35).
His cryptic handwritten notes of the January 25/26 meetings, pre-
served at the CIA, contain phrases which suggest a discussion of
assassination--and Harvey confirmed this interpretation: "last
resort beyond last resort and a confession of weakness"; "the
magic button", and "never mention word assassination". (Harvey,
Ex. 1, 6/25/75):*
The Inspector General's Report did not mention these
notes, or their dates. However, in describing Richard Bissell's
initial assignment of the "executive action" project to Harvey,
it referred to another set of Harvey's notes, which were destroyed
after the preparation of the Report. The excerpt from these notes
quoted Bissell as saying to Harvey, "The White House had twice
urged me to create such a capability" (I.G., P. 37). Harvey also
testified that this "urging" was mentioned in his initial dis-
cussion of "executive action" with Bissell (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 37).
However, the testimony from Bissell and White House aides in the
Kennedy and Eisenhower Administrations is in conflict with Harvey's
testimony as to whether such "urging" had in fact been given to
Bissell.
* Harvey's notes also contained a phrase which suggests his con-
cern that any U.S. assassination attempts might breed retaliation
from other governments: "dangers of RIS (Russian Intelligence
Service) counter-action and monitor if they are blamed." (Harvey,
Ex. 1, 6/25/75; Bissell, Ex. 1, 7/17/75).
-7-
The following testimony regarding the relationship
between "the White House" and the executive action capability
was obtained by the Committee:
Harvey: Harvey testified that his missing notes indica-
ted that Bissell mentioned White House urgings to develop an execu-
tive action capability (Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 37). Harvey said that
he "particularly remember (ed)" that Bissell said that he received
"more than one" urging from the White House (llarvey, 6/25/75,
pp. 36-37; 7/11/75, p. 59). However, he had no direct evidence
that Bissell actually had any such discussion with "the White House.'
No specific individual in the White House was named to Harvey
(Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 31). Moreover, he said that it would have been
"improper" for him to have asked Bissell who he had talked to and
"grossly improper" for Bissell to have volunteered that name:
(llarvey, 6/25/75, p. 37).
Bissell: Bissell specifically recalled assigning Harvey
to investigate the capability (Bissell, 6/9/75, p. 51). However,
Bissell did not recall "a specific conversation with anybody in
the White House as the origin" of his instruction to Harvey (Bissell,
6/9/75, p. 51).
During the course of several appearances before the
Committee, Bissell's testimony varied as to whether or not he had
been urged by the White House to develop an executive action
capability.
-8-
In his initial appearances before the Committee on June 9 and
11, 1975, Bissell made statements that tended to indicate that White
House authorization had been given. In response to the "twice urged"
quotation of llarvey's notes in the Inspector General's Report,
Bissell said, "I have no reason to believe that Harvey's quote is
wrong." (Bissell, 6/9/75, p. 51). Bissell accordingly said in his
initial testimony that as far as he knew, it was true that he was
asked by the White llouse to create a general stand-by assassination
capability. (Bissell, 6/9/75, p. 49).
Based again upon llarvey's missing notes ("White House urging")
and his initial statement that he had no reason to challenge their
accuracy, Bissell initially gave the opinion that McGeorge Bundy
(Id., 6/9/75, p. 49), Special Assistant to President Kennedy for
National Security Affairs, and Walt Rostow (Id., p. 51), Deputy
Assistant to President. Kennedy during 1961, were the two people from
whom such a request was most likely to have come (Id., p: 53) because
they were "the two members of the White House staff who were closest
to CIA operations." (Id., p. 54);
At another point in his initial testimony, Bissell. said that
the creation of the capability "may have been initiated within the
Agency" (Id., p. 81). And still later he said: "there is little
doubt in my mind that Project RIFLE was discussed with Rostow and
possibly Bundy" (Bissell, 6/11/75, p. 46).
When Bissell returned to the Committee on July 17 and 22, his
testimony, given in light of information gained since his earlier
-9-
appearances, was that there was no White House urging for the creation
of the executive action project, although tacit approval for the
"research" project was probably given by Bundy after it was established.
First, he was shown the llarvey notes which had been preserved
and which, without any mention of the White House, indicated llarvey
had received his assignment prior to January 25/26, 1961. Those
dates just 5 days after the change of administration -- made
Bissell conclude that it was "very unlikely that that assignment
to [Harvey) was taken as a result of White llouse urging or consul-
tation" (Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 10). Bissell said that Bundy. did
not have any influence on the performance of his Agency duties before
the Presidential inauguration (Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 23). . Bissell
added that he did not remember meeting with anyone in the new ad-
ministration on matters prior to the inauguration (Bissell, 7/22/75,
p. 23).
Second, when he returned in July, Bissell also said he was con-
vinced by telephone conversations with Kostow and Bundy that based
upon Rostow's duties.-- which, in 1961, had nothing to do with
covert action -- he "never discussed" executive action with Rostow
(Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 10; 7/27/75, p. 22).
As for Bundy, Bissell's final testimony (after telephone con-
tact with Bundy) was that he believed that he had informed Bundy
about the capability after it had been created (Bissell, 7/17/75,
pp. 10-11; 7/22/75, pp. 21-22). Bút Bissell confirmed his original
testimony (6/9/75, pp.
that he did not brief Bundy on the
-10-
actual assassination plots against Castro already undertaken by the
CIA (Bissell, 6/11/75, p. 47; 7/22/75, p. 31). Bissell was "quite
certain" that he would not have expected Bundy to mention the
executive action capability to the President. (Bissell, 7/22/75,
p. 35). Bissell testified:
Q. Would you think the development of a capability to
kill foreign leaders was a matter of sufficient impor-
tance to bring to the attention of the President?
Bissell: In that context and at that time and given the
limited scope of activities within that project, I would
not." (Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 35).
Bissell said that he and Bundy spoke about an untargeted
"capability" rather than the plan or approval for an assassination
operation (Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 11). Bissell said that although
he does not have a specific recollection, he "might have" mentioned
Castro, Lumumba, and Trujillo in the course of a discussion of
executive action "because these were the sorts of individuals at
that moment in history against whom such a capability might possibly
have been employed." (Bissell, 6/11/75, pp. 50-51).
Bissell said his impression was that Bundy, in addition to ex-
pressing no unfavorable reaction to the project, might have actually
given a more affirmative reaction (Bissell, 7/22/75, pp. 25, 28)
Bissell testified that he might have interpreted Bundy's reaction
as approval for the executive action concept (Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 30).
Q: I think the testimony of this witness is going
further in saying what you received from (Bundy) was,
in your view, tantamount to approval?
Bissell: I, at least, interpreted it as you can call
it approval, or you could say no objection. lle (Bundy)
-11-
was briefed on something that was being done, as I now
believe, on the initiative of the Agency. llis (Bundy's)
comment is that he made no objection to it.
I suspect
that his reaction was somewhat more favorable than that,
but this is a matter that probably someone listening to
the conversation on which such a person could have had
differing interpretations. (Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 33).
Bissell's testimony on any conversation with Bundy regarding
executive action was speculative reconstruction from first appearance
to last because he had no "clear recollection" of the events (Bissell,
7/22/75, pp. 29, 36). But Bissell maintained that more "formal and
specific and explicit approval would have been required" before any
"actual overt steps in use of the capability." (Bissell, 7/22/75,
p. 31).
Bissell said that Harvey's notation about White llouse urgings
to develop an executive action capability may have been a slightly
confused account of a conversation subsequent to the initiation of
the project in which Bissell relayed Bundy's reaction to Harvey
(Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 25).
Bissell testified that the development of an executive action
capability was "undoubtedly" initiated within the Agency (Bissell,
7/22/75, p. 22). He had acknowledged on his first day of testimony
that this would not have been unusual:
it was the normal practice in the Agency and an impor-
tant part of its mission to create various kinds of
capability long before there was any reason to be certain
whether those would be used or where or how or for what
purpose. The whole ongoing job of ... a secret intelli-
gence service of recruiting agents is of that character....
So it would not be particularly surprising to me if the
-12-
decision to create
this capability had been taken
without an outside request. (Bissell, 6/9/75, pp. 67-68).'*'
Bundy: McGeorge Bundy also testified that he had a conversation
with Bissell, during which the executive action capability was dis-
cussed (Bundy, pp. 4-5).
Bundy's testimony comports with
Bissell's on the fact that they spoke about an untargeted capability,
rather than an assassination operation (Bundy, pp. 4-5). But Bundy
said that the capability included "killing the individual" (Bundy,
p. 5).** Bundy's impression was that the CIA was "testing my reaction,"
not "seeking authority" (Bundy, p. 15). Bundy summarized his testi-
mony by saying:
But it is only fair to
I am sure I gave no instruction.
add that I do not recall that I offered any impediment
either. (Bundy, p. 10)
Bundy said that he did not take steps to halt the development of
the executive action capability or "pursue the matter at all" (Bundy,
p. 19) because he was satisfied
that this was not an operational activity, and would not
become such without two conditions: first, that there
be a desire or a request or a guidance that there should
be planning against some specific individual; and second,
that there should be a decision to move against the indi-
vidual. (Bundy, p. 7).
** For example, Bissell testified that on his own initiative, he
had requested a CIA officer to go to the Congo to "make plans and
develop the "capability" for an assassination attempt against Lumumba;
if ordered (Bissell, 6/11/75, p. 55).
** Bundy also testified that he had a vague recollection of hearing
about poison in relation to Cuba, but he did not connect this to the
conversation about executive action. (See footnote, p. 6, Kennedy:
Pre-Bay of Pigs section, supra.)
-13-
Bundy testified that he believed that neither of these conditions had
been fulfilled (Bundy, p. 7).
Bundy recalled the conversation as taking place "sometime in the
early months of 1961." (Bundy, p. 4). When questioned about the
dates in Harvey's notes, Bundy rated the chance that the conversation
about executive action took place before January 25
when Harvey
was already discussing the project at the CIA pursuant to Bissell's
directive
as "near zero" because the new Administration had been
in office less than a week and he had been preoccupied with other
problems, including the Berlin crisis and reorganizing the National.
Security staff (Bundy, p. 9).
Bundy testified that he did not brief the President on the
executive action project:
Chairman: And you have testified that you did not take
the matter to the President?
Bundy: As far as I can recall, Mr. Chairman....
(Bundy, p. 16)
Bundy explained that the division of responsibility for national
security affairs excluded Rostow from jurisdiction over covert opera-
tions, making it unlikely that Rostow would be briefed on a project
like ZRRIFLE (Bundy, p. 11; Rostow, p. 11).
Rostow: Rostow testified that he was "morally certain" that
during his entire tenure in government, he never heard a reference
to executive action or "such a capability or such an intention to
act by the U.S." (Rostow, pp. 10, 13).
Goodpaster and Gray: The responsibility for national security
affairs during the latter part of the Eisenhower Administration was
borne by Andrew Goodpaster and Gordon Gray. However, there was no
evidence which raised the name of either man in connection with the
development of an executive action capability.
Gray testified to having no knowledge of it.
Gray, p. 56.)
Both Goodpaster and
(Goodpaster, p. 11;
(c) Authorization or Knowledge of Executive Action Project
by DCI
Richard Bissell said he was "quite certain" that Allen
Dulles had full knowledge of the executive action project for two
reasons:
first, it "would have come to the DCI's attention" at the
time of the transfer of William Harvey between components of the
Agency to work on Cuban operations; and second, Bissell "would
imagine" it was mentioned to Dulles at the initiation of the project
(Bissell, 7/22/75, p. 35). Bissell and Harvey briefed Richard Helms
on Project ZRRIFLE when he became DDP (Bissell, 6/11/75, p. 53; Harvey,
7/11/75, p. 63). But Bissell did not recall briefing John McCone
about the project when McCone took over as DCI (Bissell, 7/17/75,
p. 11). McCone testified that he had no knowledge of such a project.
(McCone, p. 43).
William Harvey said it was assumed that the project was
within the parameters permitted by the DCI. But llarvey testified
that officially advising the DCI of the existence of the project
* Harvey's transfer to Cuban operations was not completed until:
late in 1961.
-15-
was "a bridge we did not cross" and would not have crossed until
"there was either specific targeting or a specific operation or a
specific recruitment." (llarvey, 6/25/75, p. 59).
(d) The Question of Whether Project ZRRIFLE was Connected
to Any Actual Assassination Plots
The Committee has sought to determine whether the CIA de-
velopment of an executive action capability was related in any way to
the actual assassination efforts. One question raised by this
inquiry is whether the participants in the assassination operations
might have perceived the executive action capability as in some way
lending legitimacy to the actual assassination efforts.
(i) Conversation Between Bissell and Bundy
In his early testimony, Bissell said he did not have
a recollection of whether he discussed the names of Castro, Lumumba,
and Trujillo with anyone in the White House in the course of discussing
the project to develop an executive action capability (Bissell, 6/11/75,
p. 51). However, Bissell testified that it was "perfectly plausible
that I would have used examples" (Bissell) 6/11/75, p. 51). He con-
tinued:
in such a discussion of a capability, I might well have
used the three names that I just gave, because these were
the sorts of individuals at that moment in history against
whom such a capability might possibly have been employed."
(Bissell; 6/11/75, p. 51).
Bissell and Bundy both testified, however, that
their discussion of the development of the capability for assassina-
tion did not involve any mention of actual assassination plans or
-16-
attempts (see detailed treatment at Section (b), supra). There
is no testimony to the contrary. The account of this conversa-
tion raises a question as to whether Bissell acted properly in
withholding from Bundy the fact that assassination efforts
against Castro had already been mounted and were moving forward.
Bundy was responsible to a new President for national security
affairs and Bissell was his principal source of information about.
covert operations at the CIA.
(ii) Bissell's Instruction to Take Over Responsibility
for Underworld Contact: November 1961
Both Bissell and Harvey recall a meeting in November
1961 in which Harvey was instructed to take over the contact with
John Roselli (Bissell, 6/11/75, pp. 19, 47; Harvey, 6/25/75, p. 86;
and 6/11/75, p. 19)--which had been used for the initial poison pili
plot as part of Project ZR/RIFLE. Harvey's notes placed the meeting
on November 15, 1961 (I.G., p. 39), during the period in which Harvey
was freed from his duties on another Agency staff to take over
direction of Task Force W, the locus of CIA activity against the
Castro regime.
According to Bissell and Harvey, the November meeting
involved only the planning and research of a capability rather than
a targeted operation against Castro (Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 13;
Harvey, 7/11/75, p. 60). But Bissell acknowledged that the purpose
of the Roselli contact had been to assassinate Castro, and that "it:
is a fair inference that there would have been no reason to maintain
-17-
it [the contact) unless there was some possibility of reactivating
that operation" (Bissell, 6/11/75, p. 19). Bissell stated that
because the assassination plot against Castro involving the syndicate
had been stood down after the Bay of Pigs
and there
was no authorization to pursue it actively
the re-
sponsibility that was given to him [Harvey) was that of
taking over an inactive contact." (Bissell, 7/17/75, p. 14)
Bissell said that he had, in effect, asked Harvey to stand watch over
the contact in case any action should be required and further testi-
fied that it was never required.
The Inspector General's Report stated: "After
Harvey took over the Castro operation, he ran it as one aspect
of ZRRIFLE." (I.G., p. 40). Harvey recalled that during a dis-
cussion with Bissell of the creation of an executive action capability,
Bissell advised him of "a then going operation" involving the names
of Maheu and possibly Roselli and Giancana, "which was a part of the
Agency's effort to develop
a capability for executive action."
(Harvey, 7/11/75, pp. 55, 61). Harvey said that at the time of
this discussion, the operation had been "in train" for "approxi-
mately two years or perhaps 18 months." (Harvey, 7/11/75, p. 54).
Although his "net impression" was that both the
"exploratory project" and the "specific operation" were "fully
authorized and approved", Harvey said he could not testify that
"specific White llouse authority for this given operation was implied
or stated". (Harvey, 7/11/75, p. 54.) Bissell does not recall
telling anyone in the White House that something had been done to
-18-
bring a CIA officer together with the criminal syndicate (Bissell,
6/11/75, pp. 19-20). Harvey did not recall any mention of the
White House or any higher authority than the DDP in his November
meeting with Bissell (Harvey, 7/11/75, pp. 60-61).
Although Richard Helms was briefed and given
administrative responsibility (as DDP) for Project ZR/RIFLE three
months later, he did not recall that ZR/RIFLE was ever contemplated
as a capability to assassinate Castro (Helms, 6/13/75, p. 55).
Asked whether the actual assassination efforts against Castro were
related to ZR/RIFLE (executive action), Helms testified: "In my
mind those lines never crossed" (Helms, 6/13/75, p. 52). However,
Bissell's testimony leaves more ambiguity: "the contact with the
syndicate which had Castro as its target
ZR/RIFLE project. and they became one" (Bissell, 6/11/75,
p. 47). When asked by Senator Baker whether the executive action
"capability .. for assassination" was "used against Castro",
Bissell replied that it was "in the later phase". (Bissell, 6/11/75,
p. 47).
The instruction from Bissell to