157-10014-10151
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification 'Form
Date: 7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10014-10151
RECORD SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-56
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM:
TO :
TITLE: SELECT COMMITTEE ASSASSINATION REPORT
DATE: 09/01/1975
PAGES: 560
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: 1
Declassified
RESTRICTIONS: IB; IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 03/21/2000
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 1
1
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10151
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMIITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-56
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
TO :
TITLE: SELECT COMMITTEE ASSASSINATION REPORT
DATE: 09/01/75
PAGES: 560′
SUBJECTS: SSCSGO, REPORT
DOCUMENT TYPE: REPORT
CLASSIFICATION: TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS : REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS : POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/08/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS :
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW. 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 2
SELECT COMMITTEE ASSASSINATION REPORT
September 1, 1975
Tab A: PROLOGUE
Tab B: Part I: Introduction and Summary
Tab C: Part II: Covert Action as Vehicle for Foreign Policy Implementation
Tab D: Part III/Cuba
Tab E: Part III/Dominican Republic
Tab F: Part III/Chile
Tab G: Part III/Congo
Tab H: Part III/South Vietnam
Tab I: Part IV: Findings and Conclusions
Tab J: Part V: Recommendations
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 3
Agreed to by Subcommittee
October 8, 1975
PROLOGUE
The events discussed in this Interim Report must be viewed in
the context of United States policy and actions designed to counter
the threat of spreading Communism. Following the end of World
War II, many nations in eastern Europe and elsewhere fell under
Communist influence or control. The defeat of the Axis powers was
accompanied by the rapid disintegration of the Western colonial
empires. The Second World War no sooner ended than a new struggle
began. The Communist threat, emanating from what was then called
the "Sino-Soviet bloc," produced a policy of containment intended
to prevent further encroachment by Communism into the "free world."
United States strategy for conducting the Cold War called for
the establishment of interlocking treaty arrangements and military
bases throughout the world. Our concern over the expansion of an
aggressive Communist monolith led the United States to fight two
major wars in Asia. In addition, it was considered necessary to
wage a relentless cold war against Communist expansion wherever
it appeared in the "back alleys of the world." This called for a
full range of clandestine activities in response to the operations
of Communist clandestine services.
The fear of expanding Communism was particularly acute when
Fidel Castro emerged as the leader of Cuba in the late 1950's.
His takeover was seen as the first significant penetration by the
Communists into the Western Hemisphere. U.S. leaders, including
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 4
2
most Members of Congress, called for vigorous action to stem the
Communist infection in this hemisphere. These policies rested on
widespread popular support and encouragement..
Throughout this period, the U.S. felt impelled to respond to
threats which were, or seemed to be, skirmishes in a global Cold
War against Communism. Castro's Cuba raised the spectre of a Soviet
outpost at America's doorstep. Events in the Dominican Republic
appeared to offer more such opportunities for the Russians and their
allies. The Congo, freed from Belgian rule, occupied the strategic
center of the African continent, and the prospect of Communist pene-
tration there was viewed as a threat to American interests in emerging
Africa. Americans are well aware of the powerful reactions set off
in the United States in the 1960's by the domino theory in Indochina.
And, even the election in 1970 of a Marxist president in Chile was
seen by some as a threat similar to that of Castro's takeover in Cuba.
The Committee regards the unfortunate events dealt with in this
Interim Report as an aberration, explainable at least in part, but
not justified, by the pressure of events at the time. The Committee
believes that it is still in the national interest of the United
States to do what it can to help nations resist Communist domination,
but it is clear that this cannot justify in the future the kind of
abuses covered in this report. Indeed, the Committee has resolved
that steps must be taken to prevent them from happening again.
do what then
lam FOR SELF-
DETERMINATION
4
ΜΗ 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 5
TOP SECRET
Agreed to by Drafting Subcommittee
on August 27, 1975*
1. INTRODUCTION AND SUDHARY
This interim report covers allegations of United States involve-
ment in assassination plots against foreign political leaders. Of equal
significance in this report are certain other cases where foreign political
leaders in fact were killed, where the United States was in some manner
involved in activity leading up to the killing, but where it would be
incorrect to say that the purpose of United States involvement had been
to encourage assassination.
The evidence establishes that the United States was implicated in
several assassination plots. The Committee believes that the use of assassi-
nation as a tool of foreign policy is incompatible with American principles,
international order, and morality. It should be rejected.
Our inquiry also revealed serious problems with respect to United
States involvement in coups directed against foreign governments. Some of
these problems are addressed here on the basis of our investigation to date;
others we raise as questions to be answered after our investigation into
covert action has been completed.
We stress the interim nature of this report. In the course of
the Committee's continuing work, other alleged assassination plots may
surface, and new evidence concerning the cases covered herein may come to
light. However, it is the Committee's view that the cases covered herein
have been developed in sufficient detail to clarify the issues which are
at the heart of the Committee's mandate to recommend legislative and other
reforms relating to the vital matters discussed below.
* The Vice Chairman reserved as to the first sentence in the discussion
of the similarities and differences among the plots. (See p.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 6
-2-
In depth treatment of the assassination question has lengthened
the Committee's schedule but has greatly increased the Committee's awareness
of the hard issues it must face in the months ahead. The Committee intends,
nevertheless, to complete, by February 1976, its main job of undertaking the
first comprehensive review of the intelligence community.
A. The Committee's Mandate
Under Senate Resolution 21, the Committee was instructed to in-
vestigate the full range of governmental intelligence activities and the
extent, if any, to which such activities were "illegal, improper or un-
ethical". In addition to that very broad general mandate, the Committee
was required by the Senate to investigate, study and make recommendations
concerning various specific matters, several of which relate to the assassi-
nation issue.*
Although the Rockefeller Commission conducted an inquiry into
reported assassination plots, the Commission declared it was unable, for
a variety of reasons, to complete its inquiry. At the direction of the Presi-
dent, the. Executive Branch turned over to the Select Committee the work
the Commission had done, along with other documents relating to assassina-
tions.
* For example, S. Res. 21 requires the Committee to study and investi-
gate the following:
the extent and necessity of
. abroad";
covert intelligence activities
"[the] nature and extent of executive branch oversight of all
United States intelligence activities";
"the need for improved, strengthened, or consolidated oversight
of United States intelligence activities by the Congress"; and
the need for new legislation.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539
Page 7
-3-
B. Committee Decision To Make This Report Public
This report raises important questions of national policy. We
believe that the public is entitled to know what certain instrumentalities
of their Government have done. Further, our recommendations can only be
judged in light of the factual record. Therefore, this interim report
should be made public.
Because of our faith in the democratic system, and the paramount
importance of strengthening the institutions of this country, the Committee
believes the truth about the assassination allegations should be told.
Democracy depends upon a well-informed electorate. Truth underlies both
justice and freedom.
STRETS the
We reject any contention that the facts disclosed herein should be
kept secret because they are embarrassing to the United States. Despite
the possible injury to our national reputation, the Committee believes that
foreign peoples will, upon sober reflection, respect the United States more
for keeping faith with its democratic ideal than they will condemn us for
the misconduct itself.
The fact that portions of the story have already been publicly dis-
closed only accentuates the need for full disclosure. Innuendo and mis-
leading partial disclosures are neither fair to the individuals involved,
nor a responsible way to lay the groundwork for informed public policy
judgments.
C. The Scope of the Committee's Investigation
The investigation of the assassination issue has been an unpleasant
duty, but one that the Select Committee had to meet. The Committee has
compiled a massive record in the months that the inquiry has been underway.
FACT THAI
extrad
that IT
CA + wlli
be dono
NW 50955 DocId:32423539 Page 8
-4-
The hearing record includes some pages of sworn testimony from
witnesses during hearing days as well as numerous staff interviews.
The documents which the Committee obtained included raw files from the
agencies and departments, from the White House, and from the Presidential
libraries of the Administrations of former Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy
Kennedy and Johnson.**
We obtained evidence of two general types: first, evidence
which related to the overall setting of events, the national policy of
the time, and descriptions of normal operating procedures including
channels of command and control; and second, evidence relating to specific
events.
A Senate Committee is not a court. It looks to the past, not to
determine guilt or innocence, but in order to make recommendations for the
future. Therefore, where we found the evidence to be ambiguous--as we did
on some issues--we have set out both sides, in order that the evidence may
speak for itself.
Despite the number of witnesses and documents examined by the
Committee, there were the following shortcomings in the evidence available
to us:
* The names of the witnesses are set forth in Appendix A.
** The Committee served both general and specific document requests upon
the Executive Branch and the Administration represented to the Committee that
it did not know of any additional relevant documents, except, of course, for
the possibility that the "Nixon papers" (which the Committee is attempting
to obtain) may contain material relevant to the allegations relating to Chile.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 9
-5-
Many of the events under consideration occurred as
long as fifteen years ago. With one exception, they
occurred during the administrations of Presidents now dead.
Other high officials, whose testimony might have
additional light upon the thorny issues of authorization
and control, are also dead. Moreover, with the passage
of time, the memories of those still alive have dimmed.
The Committee often faced the difficult task of dis-
tinguishing refreshed recollection from speculation. In
many instances, witnesses were unable to testify from in-
dependent recollection and had to rely on documents con-
temporaneous with the events to refresh their recollections.
While informed speculation is of some assistance, it can
only be assigned limited weight in judging specific events.
Assassination is not a subject on which one would
expect many records or documents to be made or retained.
In fact, there were more relevant contemporaneous documents
then we had expected, and the CIA in 1967 made internal
study of the Castro, Trujillo and Diem assassination allega-
tions. That study was quite useful, particularly in
suggesting leads for uncovering the story of the actual
assassination activity. Unfortunately, some material
* Those studies were made at the direction of CIA Director Richard Helms
to provide him with information to respond to questions put to him by
President Johnson. The President's questions, as to Castro, were provoked
by a Drew Pearson newspaper column of March (6), 1967, which had alleged
CIA attempts on the life of Castro using the Mafia.
The President asked Helms at the same time to provide information
about Trujillo and Diem.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 10
-6-
relating to that investigation was destroyed upon its
completion.*
A final deficiency in the evidence stems from the
doctrine that CIA covert operations should be concealed
from the world and performed in such a way that if they
were discovered, the role of the United States could be
plausibly denied. As an extension of this doctrine of
"plausible deniability" communications between the Agency
and high Administration officials were often convoluted
and imprecise.**
The evidence contains sharp conflicts, some of which relate to
basic facts. But the most important conflicts relate not so much to basic
facts as to differing perceptions and opinions based upon relatively undis-
puted facts.
With respect to both kinds of conflicts, the Committee has
attempted to set forth the evidence extensively so that it may speak for
itself. In the findings and conclusions section, we suggest resolutions
of some of the conflicts. Remembering that the Committee's main job is
to find lessons for the future, there are also occasions where we point
out that resolving conflicts in the evidence may be less important than
making certain that the system which produced the ambiguities is corrected.
* This was done pursuant to the instructions of CIA Director Richard
Helms (Helms Ex.; 6/13/75 Tr.). In fairness to Director Helms it
should be added, however, that he was responsible for requesting the
preparation of the I.G. Reports and for preserving them.
** For a full discussion of this doctrine see pages
NW 50955 DocId:32423539 Page 11
-7-
D. Summary of Findings and Conclusions
1. The Questions Presented
The Committee sought to answer four broad questions:
ASSASSINATION PLOTS. Did U.S. officials instigate,
attempt, aid and abet, or acquiesce in plots designed to
assassinate foreign leaders?
INVOLVEMENT IN OTHER KILLINGS. Did U.S. officials
assist foreign dissidents in a way which significantly con-
tributed to the killing of foreign leaders?
AUTHORIZATION. Where there was involvement by U.S.
officials in assassination plots or other killings, were such
activities ordered and if so, at what levels of our Government?
COMMUNICATION AND CONTROL. Even if not authorized,
were the assassination activities perceived to be within the
scope of agency authority, and was adequate control exercised
over its activities.
2. Summary of Findings and Conclusions on the Plots
The Seven Allegations. The Committee investigated alleged
U.S. involvement in assassination plots in five foreign countries.* They
were:
Country
Cuba
Congo (Zaire)
* Insert Footnote on Sukarno and Duvalier.
** Insert re Raul and Che and Ngo Dinh Nhu.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 12
Individual Involved**
Fidel Castro
Patrice Lumumba
Country
Dominican Republic
Chile
South Vietnam
Individual Involved
Rafael Trujillo
General Rene Schneider
Ngo Dinh Diem
In summary, the evidence with respect to each allegation disclosed
the following.*
Fidel Castro (Cuba). United States Government personnel plotted
to kill Castro beginning in 1960. American underworld figures were used in
these plots as well as Cubans hostile to the Castro regime. One of the later
plots, which lasted until 1965, involved a Cuban dissident who was provided
encouragement and material support by the United States..
Patrice Lumumba (Congo/Zaire). In the Fall of 1960, two CIA
officials were asked by superiors to assassinate Lumumba. Poisons were
sent to the Congo and some exploratory steps were taken toward gaining
access to Lumumba. Subsequently, in early 1961, Lumumba was killed by
Congolese rivals. It does not appear from the evidence that the United
States was involved in the actual killing.
Rafael Trujillo (Dominican Republic). Trujillo was shot by
Dominican dissidents on May 31, 1961. Commencing in 1960 and continuing
to the time of the assassination, the U.S. Government generally supported
these dissidents and some Government personnel were aware that they intended
to kill Trujillo. Three pistols and three carbines were furnished by
American officials, although a request for machine guns was later refused.
There was conflicting evidence whether the weapons were knowingly supplied
for use in the assassination and whether any were present at the scene.
* See Section III for a detailed treatment of the evidence.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 13
-9-
General Rene Schneider (Chile). On October 25, 1970, General
Schneider died of gunshot wounds inflicted while resisting a kidnap attempt
three days earlier. Schneider, as Commander in Chief of the Army and a
constitutionalist opposed to military coups, was considered an obstacle to
efforts to prevent Salvador Allende from assuming the office of President
of Chile. The United States Government supported, and sought to instigate,
a military coup to block Allende. U.S. officials supplied financial aid,
machine guns and other equipment to various military figures who opposed
Allende. There was conflicting evidence on whether the United States had
previously severed relations with the group that kidnapped and killed
Schneider and on whether any of the equipment supplied was actually used
in the kidnapping.
Ngo Dinh Diem (South Vietnam). Diem and his brother, Nhu, were
killed on November 2, 1963, in the course of a South Vietnamese Generals'
coup. Although the United States Government supported the coup, there was
no evidence that American officials favored the assassination. Indeed, it
appeared that the assassination of Diem was not part of the Generals' pre-
coup planning but was instead a spontaneous act which occurred during the
coup and with which there was no American connection.
In addition to these five cases the Committee received evidence
that ranking government officials discussed, and may have authorized, the
establishment within the CIA of a generalized capability to assassinate.
Similarities and Differences Among the Plots. The plots all
involved Third World countries, most of which were relatively small and
none of which possessed great political or military strength. Apart from
that similarity, there were significant differences among the plots. The
following distinctions are pertinent:
(1) Whether United States officials initiated the plot or
were responding to requests of local dissidents for aid;
(2) Whether the plot was specifically intended to kill a
foreign leader, or whether the leader's death was a reasonably
foreseeable consequence of an attempt to overthrow the govern-
ment.
The Castro case is an example of a plot conceived by United States
officials to kill a foreign leader. The Lumumba plot falls into the same
category.
In the case of Trujillo, although the U. S. Government certainly
opposed his regime, it did not initiate the plot. Rather, United States
officials responded to requests for aid from local dissidents whose aim
clearly was to assassinate Trujillo. By aiding them this country was in-
plicated, whether the specific weaponry actually supplied was meant to kill
Trujillo or was only intended as a symbol of U.S. support for the dissidents.
The Schneider case is different from that of both Castro and Tru-
jillo. The United States Government sought a coup and provided support to
local dissidents, knowing they believed that General Schneider was an obstacle
to their plans. However, even though the support included deadly weapons,
it appears that the intention of both the dissidents and the United States
officials was to abduct, not to kill, General Schneider. Similarly, in
the Diem case, United States officials did want a change in Government, but
there is no evidence that the United States sought the death of Diem himself.
3. Summary of Findings and Conclusions on the Issues of Authority
and Control.
To put the inquiry into assassination allegations in context, two
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 14
-10-
points must be made clear. First, there is no doubt that the United States
Government opposed the various leaders in question. U.S. officials
at the highest levels objected to the Castro and Trujillo regimes, believed
the accession of Allende to power in Chile would be harmful to American in-
terests, and thought of Lumumba as a dangerous force in the heart of Africa.
Second, the evidence on assassinations has to be viewed in the context of other,
more massive activities directed against the regimes in question. For
example, the plots directed against Fidel Castro personally, cannot be under-
stood without considering the fully authorized, comprehensive, assaults upon
his regine, such as the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and Operation Mongoose in
1962.
However, the issue of Governmental authorization of assassination
is of independent importance. There is a significant difference between a
coldblooded, targeted, intentional killing of an individual foreign leader and
other forms of intervention in the affairs of foreign nations. Therefore,
the Committee endeavored to explore as fully as possible the question of
how and why the plots happened, whether they were authorized, and if so, from
what level the authorization came..
We discovered a murky picture. It is not clear whether this is
due to the system of deniability and the consequent state of the evidence
which even after our long investigation remains conflicting and inconclusive,
or whether there were in fact serious shortcomings in the system of authori-
zation so that activities such as assassinations could have been undertaken by
an agency of the United States Government without express authority.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 16
-11-
Based upon the record of our investigation, the Committee's
single most important finding is that the system was such that assassina-
tion activity could have been undertaken by an agency of the United States
Government without it having been uncontrovertibly clear that there was
explicit authorization from the highest level.
Along with that paramount conclusion, the Committee makes four other
major findings. The first relates to the lack of direct evidence of authori-
zation of the assassination plots by Presidents or other persons above the
Governmental agency or agencies involved. The second explains why certain
officials may have, nonetheless, perceived that, according to their judgment
and experience, assassination was an acceptable course of action. The third
criticizes agency officials for failing on several occasions to reveal their
plans and activities to superior authorities, or for failing to do so with
sufficient detail and clarity. The fourth criticizes Administration officials
for, on occasion, giving vague and indirect instructions to subordinates, and
for not making sufficiently clear that assassination should be excluded from
consideration.
There is admittedly a tension within the four findings. The first
and third points tend to suggest a lack of authority while the second and
fourth points explain why agency officials could nonetheless have perceived
that their actions were proper. This tension reflects a basic conflict in the
evidence. While there are some conflicts over facts, it is more important
that there may often have been two differing perceptions of the same facts.
This distinction may be the result of the differing backgrounds and ex-
perience of those persons experienced in covert operations as distinquished
* The Committee's findings are elaborated in Section
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 17
infra.
-12-
from those who were not. Words of urgency which to the former may have meant
killing, to the latter may have meant nothing of the sort.
While we are critical of certain individual actions, the Committee
is mindful of the inherent problems in a system which relies upon secrecy,
compartmentation, circumlocution, and the avoidance of clear responsibility.
This system creates the risk of confusion and rashness in the very areas where
clarity and sober judgment are most necessary. Hence, before turning to an
extensive review of the evidence relating to the cases, we briefly deal with
the general subject of covert action during the relevant period.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 18
TOP SECRET
Agreed to by Drafting Subcommittee
on August 28, 1975
II. COVERT ACTION AS VEHICLE FOR FOREIGN POLICY IMPLEMENTATION
Simply stated, covert action may be defined as activity which sup-
ports the sponsoring nation's foreign policy objectives but is concealed
under circumstances permitting that nation to plausibly deny its actions.
The National Security Act of 1947 did not specifically include
authority for covert operations. However, it granted to the National
Security Council, then created as an instrument of the President, the
authority to direct the CIA to "perform such other functions and duties
related to intelligence affecting the national security as the National
Security Council may from time to time direct." Thereafter, at its
first meeting in December 1947, the National Security Council issued
a top secret directive granting the CIA the authority to conduct covert
operations. From 1955 to 1970, the basic authority for these operations
was National Security Council 5412/2.*
This directive framed the purposes of covert operations entirely
in terms of opposition to "International Communism, "** directing the CIA
to counter, reduce and discredit "International Communism" throughout the
world in a manner consistent with U. S. foreign and military policies.
It also directed the CIA to undertake covert operations to achieve this
end, and defined covert operations as any covert activities related to
* Today the basic authority for CIA covert action operations is National
Security Decision Memorandum 40, which superceded NSC 5412/2 on Feb-
ruary 17, 1970.
** By contrast, NSAM 40 of 1970 described covert actions as those secret
activities designed to further official U. S. programs and policies
abroad. It made no reference to communism.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 19
-2-
propaganda, economic warfare, political action (including sabotage,
demolition and assistance to resistance movements) and all activities
compatible with the directive (emphasis supplied). In 1962, the CIA's
General Counsel rendered the opinion that the Agency's activities are
"not inhibited by any limitations other than those broadly set forth
in NSC 5412/2." (CIA General Counsel Memorandum 4/6/62)
POLICY DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL MECHANISM
The evidence dealt with in Part III is concerned with what actually
happened as far as obtaining, or not obtaining, authorization for the ac-
tivities under review by the Committee. With respect to what was meant
to happen in regard to covert action generally, the CIA's General Counsel
stated in 1962:
CIA must necessarily be responsible for planning. Oc-
casionally suggestions for action will come from out-
side sources but, to depend entirely on such require-
ments would be an evasion of the Agency's responsibili-
ties. Also, the average person, both in government and
outside, is thinking along normal lines and to develop
clandestine cold war activities properly, persons know-
ing both the capabilities and limitations of clandestine
action must be studying and devising how such actions
can be undertaken effectively.
With respect to policy approval, the General Counsel went on to say:
Both in developing ideas or plans for action it is in-
cumbent upon the Agency to obtain necessary policy ap-
proval, and for this purpose these matters should be
explored with proper officials in other departments
and agencies, particularly in the Departments of State
and Defense, so the determination can be made as to
whether any one proposal should go to the Special Group
or higher for policy determination.
The General Counsel's 1962 memorandum made it clear that the CIA
considered itself responsible for developing proposals and plans to
NW 50955 DocId:32423539 Page 20
-3-
implement the specific objectives of NSC 5410/2. At the same time, how-
ever, the memorandum stated that even in the development of ideas or plans
for action, it was incumbent upon the Agency not only to coordinate with
other executive departments and agencies, but also to "obtain necessary
policy approval" (emphasis added). The issue which faced the Committee,
of course, was whether such approval was, in fact, sought and obtained
for assassination plans, and whether CIA officials thought it was "neces-
sary" to obtain express approval for these activities.
Beginning in 1955, the responsibility for authorizing CIA covert
action operations rested in the Special Group, a sub-Cabinet level sub-
committee of the National Security Council composed of the President's
Assistant for National Security Affairs, the Director of Central In-
telligence, the Deputy Secretary of Defense and the Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs. Today this group is known as the 40 Com-
mittee, and its membership now includes the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff. In addition, during 1962 another subcommittee of the NSC was
established to oversee covert operations relating to Cuba. It was known
as the Special Group (Augmented) and was composed of the members of the
Special Group, the Attorney General and certain other high officials..
The overriding purpose of the Special Group and its successors
has been to exercise control over covert operations abroad. The Special
Group was charged with the responsibility of considering the objectives
of any proposed activity, whether or not it would accomplish these aims,
how likely it would be to succeed, and in general whether or not it would
be "proper" and in the American interest. The Special Group Chairman
usually was responsible for determining which projects required Presi-
dential consideration, as well as keeping him abreast of progress or changes.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 21
-4-
The foregoing should not be taken to imply that the procedures
always have been clear and tidy, nor that they have always been fol-
lowed. Prior to 1955, formal procedures barely existed at all. In
1955 the Special Group procedures were made more formal. Neverthe-
less, the procedures that were followed during the period of 1959-63
were characterized by an internal CIA memorandum as "somewhat cloudy
and thus can probably be described as having been based on value judg-
ments by the DCI." (Memorandum for the Record, C/CA/PEG, "Policy Co-
ordination of CIA's Covert Action Operations," 21 February 1967)
In addition to the "somewhat cloudy" nature of the formal pro-
cedures themselves, there are other options available to any Chief Ex-
ecutive. The Committee recognizes that an agency charter to plan cov-
ert action could not preempt Presidential authority to develop and
mandate foreign policy. Similarly, it is equally clear that what may
be represented as the "desire" of a President is often communicated by
intermediary officials whose perceptions may or may not accurately
reflect the true Presidential purpose. Obviously, formal procedures
can be disregarded from above or below. In at least one case, for
example, a President instructed CIA officials not to consult with the
Special Group or other departments. In at least one other case, Agency
officials decided not to bring matters to the attention of the Special
Group. It should also be noted that all of the above procedures apply
to activities labeled "covert action" whereas some of the activities
considered in this report were treated as "counter-intelligence" actions.
Such actions are not normally subject to 40 Committee-type interdepart-
mental authorization and review.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 22
-5-
The Concept of "Plausible Deniability"
Non-attribution for U. S. Government covert operations was the
original and principal purpose of the so-called doctrine of plausible
denial.
Evidence before the Committee clearly demonstrates that this con-
cept, designed to protect the U. S. and its operatives from the conse-
quences of disclosures, has been significantly expanded to: (1) mask
not only Presidential decisions but those of his senior staffers; (2)
support less than complete advice to such persons regarding these op-
erations.
The quest for "plausible denial" has shaped the processes of the
U. S. Government for approving and evaluating covert actions. The 40
Committee and its predecessors can serve as "circuit breakers" for a
President, placing the locus of consideration of covert action at sev-
eral removes from the Oval office. One consequence of the doctrine of
plausible denial is an incomplete documentary record.
The quest for "plausible denial" has also led to the use of cer-
tain techniques, including euphemism and circumlocution. These tech-
niques have had as their purpose the objective of allowing the Presi-
dent and other senior officials to deny knowledge of an operation should
it be disclosed. In addition, the use of indirect reference to inform
a President could be reversed--a President could communicate his desire
to see a highly sensitive operation undertaken in a similar indirect,
circumlocutious manner. Whether, at times circumlocution had the effect
of failing to let Presidents or other officials accurately understand
what was being said, was a question faced by the Committee.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539 Page 23
-6-
"Plausible deniability" raises a number of other issues which the
Committee has had to confront. Differing interpretations of the practice
of plausible denial has affected the extent to which sensitive matters
were raised or considered. The evidence discussed below revealed that
very serious problems of assessing and insuring accountability and con-
trol can arise out of plausible deniability.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539
Page 24
on August 29, 1975
3. Cuba
We have divided the facts with respect to Cuba into three
broad sections.
The first discusses the plots against Fidel Castro's life
without attempting to confront the question of authorization.
The second deals with the evidence concerning whether or not
the successive Directors of Central Intelligence, Allen Dulles and John
McCone, authorized or knew about the various plots. (Although we have
organizationally divided the evidence relating to the DCI's from the
proof relating to other high administration officials, it is important
to remember that the Director of Central Intelligence is the principal
advisor to the President on intelligence matters, a member of major
administrative policy-making councils as well as head of the Central
Intelligence Agency.)
The third section covers the evidence concerning whether or
not other high officials--including the various Presidents--authorized
or knew about the plots. This section also considers the evidence relating
to whether or not the CIA officials who were involved with the plots believed
them to be consistent with the general policy objectives of the various
administrations even if they had no personal knowledge as to whether the
plots were or were not specifically authorized by higher authority.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423539