176-10036-10058
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
`IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER: 176-10036-10058
RECORD SERIES: National Security Files
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM :
TO: Director, CIA
TITLE: Activities of Cuban Trained Peruvian Guerrillas
DATE: 4/11/1963
PAGES: 5
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 9/10/2000
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: National Security Files, Box 51: Cuba, Subjects intelligence material
6/63-7/63. Box 1
ว
Janitized
NLK
09795 (SECRET
EYES ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
11 April 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT:
Activities of Cuban-Trained Peruvian Guerrillas
1. The information in this memorandum comes from an extremely
sensitive source who is currently a member of a group of Cuban-trained
Peruvian guerrillas. No other dissemination has been made of the re-
ports he has provided, in order to protect him and to insure that a
channel is kept open to him. The information is being forwarded in
this restricted manner at this time to furnish an insight mich an insight into the
extent of Cuban efforts to assist Latin American revolutionary Love-
mento. The Agency directed asset is vorking inside a network which is
now assisting Cuban-trained Latin Americans to re-enter their ow
countries illegally, and to join with leftist revolutionary groups to
overthrow the established goverments.
2. The Agency esset was a member of a group of more than 70
Peruvians trained in Cuba from June until December 1962. His contingent
traveled in small groups by way of Mexico. He received his first
special assignment when he was appointed to stay behind in Mexico
temporarily and to act as a olandestine contact with a Cuban Embassy
official there. The Cuban gave him instructions and funds, and be
directed the later groups which transited Hexic
3. The Peruvian group was ostensibly in Cuba only to attend the
July ce celebrations. According to our agent, some of the the members m ther
selves did not know in advance they were to bè given training. The
Oubane set the Peruvians up as self-contained unite in secret train
ing ag sites in Habana, where they were were given political indoctrination
and weapons. Later they were moved to rural hill areas for guerrilla
training. The agent has described in detail these ese secret secret t tran
sites, giving address of the houses and the locations of the guer
rilla areas.
4. The agent was removed from his group for several weeks to
undergo special training in secret communications t techniques,
preparetion for his current assignment.
5. At present, the agent acts as coordinator, helping the
Peruvians to return illegally to Paru. He is in correspondence with
SECRET
(4)
SECRET
2
persons in mumerous points of entry in Latin America and with contacts
in several European capitals who assist the group on their clandestine
return. Although many left Peru openly on valid papers, they are coming
back illegally. Some have false documentation from other countries,
primarily from Colombia; some have Peruvian passports issued in the
names of persons now deceased, some are crossing the borders from
neighboring countries clandestinely without showing any any papers; and
some go by small boats to isolated areas.
6. The agent is a member of the Movimiento Izquierda Revolu-
cionario (HIR) of Peru which now plans to join with other leftist
revolutionary groups to bring about a coup before the elections
scheduled for June 1963. The agent knows of come 200 Peruviane who
have received Cuban training, only a small percentage of whom are
actually Communist Party members.
7. Approximately 300 persons have been named by the agent as
being connected with the ring helping the Peruvians to reinfiltrate
secretly. Attempts are being made to learn whether some of these,
particularly those used as "Co-ordinators" or "Correspondence points"
in Europe and the United States, are also connected with the illegal
return of Ouban-trained guerrillas to other countries.
8. Paris has emerged as the center of the network. Groups of
ten arrive weekly from Cuba to be sent on to various Latin American
countries for eventual re-entry into Peru. . The man in charge of the
Peruvians is headquartered in Paris. From there, he has been direct-
ing the travel, sending instructions to his scattered subordinates,
and receiving reports reports and information from con contacte throughout the
world, and handling funds
9. Correspondence between members of the group is by cable and
by letter. ter. The security of communications is protected by several
alternate systems of code and secret writing. Each of the trainces
has been assigned a number, and letter and number designations are
given to hotels and pensione. In cable correspondence, the ring uses
these numbers to indicate which persons are traveling and where they
may be reached. The content of the messages appears to relate to
business matters, covering shipment dates and invoice invo numbers for
example. Letter correspondence contains secret writing with
relatively sophiscated systems, interspaced between lines of innocuous
friendly or business, letters. A A dictionary is used for coded nos-
sages in either cables or letters, with page and word number rofer
ring to olandestine kay words
SECRET
SECRET
3
10. The ring takes great precautions to prevent tracing of the
addressees. One of the important links is a woman whose Paris home
has entrances on two different streets. She and her husband use the
principal street address for their normal nom lives, , but but the back stre
address for the receipt of clandestine correspondence.
11. In this Cuban-sponsored subversive operation, routes of
travel are planned to escape easy detection of the fact that a person
has left his home, been trained, and, bas, returned to his country.
Most of the travel has been by way of Mexico and thence to Cuba,
since it was possible to escape detection of the travel. The Cubang.
Issued Loose leaf inserts for the travelers' passports, rather than
stamping a record of the travel in the document itself. The Mexican
Coverment has recently begun measures to control this travel, but a
Large number have managed to enter and leave Ouba for Mexico without
detection. Some of the travel to Cube is by way of the Dutch and British
West Indies
12. Many of of the returning trainees go through Paris and Prague
From Paris, the travelers fan out to ember of different Latin
American countries, from which they attempt olandestine he re- re-entry into
Peru. Ecuador, Colombis and Brazil have been used extensively as
Latin American entry points as the travelors leave Paris
13. The apont egant reports that money for this extensive travel.
program has been deposited in Swiss banks by by the Chinese Communists,
via Cuba. HIR trainees were told not not to to to ask for aid from om the th Soviets
to avoid straining relations with China, "since it is backing them".
Our asset was responsible for the safekeeping of approximately $15,000
when he arrived in Paris. The money The money had been parceled out among a
number of trainees during the trip, and they handed it to the Paris
coordinator there. Our asset was given $1,000 when he left Paris,
which he was to use for documentation when he was ready ready to re-enter
Peru. Ho reported eported that the cost of the travel of t his group from
Peru to Cuba vas approximately $25,000, and t and that this money was
brought at to to a local leader from from Paris Paris by courier before the trip,
The MIR plans to establish a a cover importing importing company repr
senting a French firm which exports cheap agricultural equipment. equi
The branch i Peru will serve as a cover for activities involving
the travel of MIR members and the transfer of funds. It will also
be a clearing house for information and instructions. When the
current int group of trainees is back back in Peru, another group will be
sent out, and t, and funded through the cover fim. The agent reports that
SECRET
4
the next group will mumber approximately 100 men and that they will
receive instructions in Algeria, North Vietnam, Laos, and China. The
top leader of the Peruvian group has told his lieutenants that ho will
soon go to Algeria to start arrangements for this training.
15. The MIR has planned four fronts in Peru in its proposed
revolution. One is in the south with headquarters in Cusco, another
is in the central region in the Sierra, a third is in Lima, and the
fourth is in northern Peru. The agent has named the leaders in charge
of each of the four fronts.
16. Our asset makes frequent reference to internal disputes in
the MIR between the old line Communists and those referred to as
Trotskyites. The MIR leaders in Quba felt that some of their own
groups had joined with the Trotskyites and they discussed this problem
with Fidel Castro. Castro promised not to let the so-called Trotaky-
ites return to Peru until the others were already in place and in
command of the several fronts. Som Some of the avowed Trotskyites were
among the first to be sent back, however, and the MIR leaders are
highly incensed. The leaders fear that the Trotskyites will endangor
the movement, and they have been especially disturbed to find that
two Cuban officers, who are known to be frotskyites, had accompanied
them from Cuba.
17. The Agency asset had first estimated that it would take at
least two months for all of the Peruvians to return. The re-entry
program had fallen approximately a month behind schedule because of
unexpected problems of transferring funds and obtaining documents.
Moreover, a Communist group in one of the neighboring countries which
was to help them began to charge exorbitant amo
The Peruvians were obliged to wait until additional money was brought
to them by courier.
amounts for its assistance
18. The agent also, estimated that at least another month or
two would be required to complete plans for the revolution after all
of the trainees were back. The leaders of the trainees complained
that the MIR had not made adequate plans to recoive the groups and
had not developed its revolutionary plans soundly.
19. Recently, however, the operation has been increasing in
tempo, The leadere of the MIR have been putting additional pressures.
on our asset and on others in the chain to speed up re-entry. A
number of the trainees have spread out to mall neighboring tome,
ready to cross the border into Peru clandestinely. False documenta-
tion of these nearby countries is also being procured to assist others
to cross into Peru "legally,
SECRET
5