176-10030-10168
v9.1
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 5/5/2016
Agency Information
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER: 176-10030-10168 [Dup 176-10030-10085]
RECORD SERIES: ORAL HISTORY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
FROM:
TO:
TITLE: ORAL HISTORY INTERVIEW WITH EDWARD G. LANSDALE
DATE: 07/11/1970
PAGES: 124-
SUBJECTS: VIETNAM, CUBA-BAY OF PIGS
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: Not Marked
RESTRICTIONS: 1B
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 06/26/1998
OPENING CRITERIA: sanitized version
COMMENTS:
SANITIZED MK.99.41 12/00.
Oral History Interview
with
EDWARD G. Lansdale
July 11, 1970
Alexandria, Virginia
By Dennis J. O'Brien
For the John F. Kennedy Library
O'BRIEN: I think a logical place to begin in anything
like this is just simply with the question,
when did you first meet President Kennedy,
or Senator Kennedy, if you met him before
he was President?
LANSDALE: I don't recall meeting him before he was
President. The first meeting was/ I believe,
the first Saturday following the inauguration,
whatever date that was. I was called into a
meeting in the White House by (Robert S.)
McNamara. It was a meeting, on, actually, on
a report that I had written for (Dwight D.)
Eisenhower. It was sort of a, I'm not sure
that it was, NSC (National Security Council)
meeting, but it was comparable to that with
the personnel that were attending. There were
several Secretaries: Defense, State, and his
National Security people were there.
O'BRIEN: Could you have been with McNamara and [Roswell L.]
Gilpatric, members of the incoming administra-
tion, before they actually assumed office?
LANSDALE: Just before, that is, a day or so before. I'd
been in Vietnam for a brief visit and got back
just before the inaugural, maybe two or three
days, and at that time both McNamara and
Gilpatric were in Defense getting briefed for
their new jobs. I met them at that time.
The outgoing Deputy Secretary of Defense asked
me to start working with Gilpatric, and so I
got Gilpatric rather than McNamara.
O'BRIEN: This is [James H.] Douglas.
LANSDALE: This is Jim Douglas (James H. Douglas).
O'BRIEN: How is Douglas to work with, while you're with
him? Is he a pretty sympathetic person?
LANSDALE: Yes, very much so, very much so. He was the
one, actually, who wrote the orders and back-
stopped my visit to Vietnam, and back-
stopped it principally so that I could take
a look at some of the political factors as
well as economic, military, and psychological,
and everything else. This, frankly, took a
consideration on his part
that because my views weren't always
popular in other parts of the government.
I gathered that there was some opposition to
my going out, and he insisted on it.
O'BRIEN: I'd like to come back to that. I wonder if
we could go on to talk about one of the major
problems, which is Cuba. When is the first
time that you hear about the Bay of Pigs
invasion, not the Bay of Pigs, but the plans
to?
LANSDALE: Sometime in the fall of sixty. I think that
I heard of it about the first time that it
was brought up to the inter-policy group of
the Eisenhower administration. I was the
Deputy Assistant to the Secretary of Defense,
at the time, for Special Operations and used
to accompany the Deputy Secretary, who was a
member of the inter-policy group, to most of
the meetings that they had. When Allen Dulles
(Allen W. Dulles) first raised the notion to
the inner group. I was present at the meeting
as an assistant.
O'BRIEN: What is the thinking about it at that time?
What kind of operation is it--
basically a guerrilla operation at this point?
LANSDALE: Initially, it was. Initially, it was very differ-
ent than the way it turned out. It was based
on a premise that many people in Cuba were very
unhappy with the Castro administration and the
way it was turning away from the initial
revolutionary objectives and the capture of the
revolutionary movement by the Communist Party,
which surprised many of the supporters of
Castro as a guerrilla and as a revolutionary
action. So the thought was to back a number
of Cubans who either had been supporters of
Castro or were very unhappy, were still resident
in Cuba, and to cause some overturn at the time.
The change of plan towards the Bay of Pigs
thing evolved fairly gradually and apparently
there was a planning group and CIA (Central
Intelligence Agency) who were working on this
initial plan who started thinking in military
invasion terms. I suspect that they were
doing that because some of the Cuban military
and military types, that is, very militant,
were coming out of
Cuba as refugees, and they suddenly saw a
windfall of manpower and started thinking in
other terms of use of them. But, this change
was, the changed plan towards the Bay of Pigs
thing, was well under way in the inner circle
thinking of CIA by December of '60, very defi-
nitely so.
O'BRIEN: Who were some of the inner circle people at
this point, do you recall?
LANSDALE: Let's see, golly. [Pierre B.] Salinger, of course.
O'BRIEN: I imagine [Richard M.] Bissell was!
LANSDALE: Richard M. Bissell was the overall chief of
the group.
O'BRIEN: Tracy Barnes, was he in it at that time?
LANSDALE: Tracy was an assistant to him. How far
Tracy went in the actual planning, I have my
doubts that he was.
O'BRIEN: How about Broe, William Broe?
LANSDALE: He was one of a planning group who were
planning the operation, but he wasn't a chief,
and I can't recall the guy's name offhand.
O'BRIEN: Oh well, maybe when you get the transcript back,
you can. How about from some of the other
places--days?
LANSDALE: C. Mann, I
LANSDALE: Yes, but initially it was all CIA. They
borrowed some military personnel to help with
the planning, earlier, but they were people
who had been attached to CIA for temporary
duty on other matters, and they hadn't come
in initially for this specific planning. In
December, when the planning had obviously
started coming in with a beach landing and so
on, the way it turned out, I urged at that
point to get military planning in on the
thing. I was worrying about it. As a matter
of fact, Allen Dulles brought his planners
to a policy meeting, a policy group meeting,
and they were explaining the concept and my
questioning was such that Allen Dulles pleaded
with me not to spoil the plan at an early
stage. I remember General (Lyman L.)
Lemnitzer was sitting in the meeting.
He was chairman of the JCS (Joint Chiefs of
Staff) at the time, and he backed up my urging
them to get some military planning in on that.
After that, there was agreement among our
people, and then the JCS set up
a special section to plan along with the
(Central Intelligence) Agency on that. And who
the hell headed that?
O'BRIEN: This is yet in the Eisenhower administration.
LANSDALE: This is all back in 1960. This was still in
the early planning stages. This was before
training or anything like that was put forward.
O'BRIEN: When the JCS got into the act, I asked to be
disassociated with the project. I was rather
critical of the concept, and it was just too
clumsy and overt and a poor-planned, do-it-
yourself type of thing. A lot of people have
knowledge of this, by the
end of the Eisenhower administration?
LANSDALE: I don't know how widespread it was. There
were key executives that were knowledgeable,
there was a small group in the JCS that was
knowledgeable, and there was a planning group
at CIA, but I don't think it went beyond that.
I don't know how far it was known, but I
thought it was rather closely held.
O'BRIEN: You don't know whether the presidential candi-
dates were at all, do you?
LANSDALE: Yes, they were. There was a very definite
no, wait a minute. The candidates, no, I don't
think they were. As a matter of fact, it was
still in a rather nebulous stage of shifting
over in early November. I think somebody
told me, if I recall correctly, that the concept
was in the form of a memo in CIA about August,
so this would be well after the candidates
had been nominated and so on. I imagine that
it was held by two or three people in the CIA
at the time. At least, the rest of us certainly
didn't know it. I forget exactly when I first
heard it, but it would be possibly October,
but it might have even been November, by the
time I heard about it. As I say, I heard
about it when it was surfaced with the inner
circle of our administration executives.
O'BRIEN: Well, I suppose you had some conversations
with Dulles and with Bissell and some of
these people about it.
LANSDALE: Yes.
O'BRIEN: What's their feeling? You already discussed
Dulles, and I'm asking you to sort of
hold your criticism.
LANSDALE: Well, Bissell definitely felt the same way.
Bissell was a very hard-working, intense person,
almost high-strung type of individual. He
became rather impatient with my questioning
of the changed concept when it took place. I thought
initially if they had the correct personnel
and they had a correct reading of dissent
inside of Cuba, that was a fair chance to do
something. My only concern at the time was:
did the CIA have the Americans who could work
with such a situation? I just didn't know
of any, but I was assured that there were such
Americans, but I'm not certain that there were.
O'BRIEN: Did you question the kind of intelligence that
was coming out about Cuba and the expected
reaction to Castro in general?
LANSDALE: Just in very general terms. I didn't have
enough concrete and specific information
myself that was separate from theirs. Most
of the intelligence take at the time, avail-
able inside the U.S. government, was pretty
colored with this dissatisfaction and state-
ments of it. So, I had no real way of
determining the accuracy or inaccuracy of it.
Some of the adjectives used in describing this
in briefings to us alerted me a little bit.
It just sounded too much like a sales job on
a viewpoint. I'd question that, whether that
was an accurate thing, so this is about as far
as I went.
O'BRIEN: How does a guy like Douglas react? Do you
recall?
LANSDALE: Well, he approved of the plan, so he and the
others at the policy level approved of going
ahead with it, and developing it. I was his
advisor on this thing (that was my staff job),
and I told him to be certain to get the JCS
to give it a real hard scrutiny and to come
up with details of whether it could succeed
or not. That was my last advisory role with
him. I was taken off advising on the project
after that, actually by my own request because
I was apparently causing too much trouble and
O'BRIEN: ...s the reaction of the Joint Chiefs, people
like Lemnitzer, towards this? Is there an
institutional rivalry or bureaucratic rivalry
here in their minds?
LANSDALE: Somewhat, somewhat. It was a little bit as
though, well, somebody's going to be playing
Boy Scouts, so this isn't really rivalry.
They had a difficult time taking this really
seriously. Later, I know, when the JCS got
in on the actual planning of this, they became
much more serious on it because they had a
share of it.
O'BRIEN: Well, do you get involved in the informing
of McNamara and Gilpatric about this? Do you
get any way of sensing what their reactions
are on first being informed?
LANSDALE: No. They had apparently known by the time I
met them, I didn't get in on that. The one
person who would have a view of their reactions
would probably be Bill Bundy (William F.
Bundy), who I know at the time was discussing
this with them.
O'BRIEN: Did you have at that point? Bundy and
LANSDALE: Yes. This was a little out of Bundy's field.
He was always trying to figure out what the
chances were, the percentages of win or loss.
He was low, and I hadn't known the final plan
on this thing, and Bundy did, and he asked me
what I thought. I told him, well, if the JCS
guarantees something, you can take it 10 percent
lower than that and go along with it. I'm not
sure that they know a clandestine operation,
but they'd sure know a military landing, whether
it would succeed or not. Given some of the
unknowns in this thing, I say that by 10 percent
and go along with the figure. Well, apparently
they had given it a high chance of success,
the JCS had, because Bundy said, "Well, you mean
it's going to succeed then?" I said, "Well, I
don't know." I gathered that he felt it would
succeed.
O'BRIEN: Well, then, you are pretty much out of touch
with it until it actually comes off.
LANSDALE: That's right.
O'BRIEN: You didn't get into any of the changes in the
plans there at all?
LANSDALE: No. I left at around the first of December,
'60. I really didn't follow it from then on.
O'BRIEN: Does anyone come to you from the Agency or
from State, or from the White House, as far
as that goes, and attempt to seek an indepen-
dent judgment on your part, for your background and all, on
your success?
LANSDALE: No.
O'BRIEN: How about the noise level on this? Obviously
you're out of it, but is there much talk
about it that is sort of filtering down
in Defense and the people that are around you
that really have no need to know and direct
involvement?
LANSDALE: I wasn't aware of it. There might have been,
but I have no knowledge of that.
O'BRIEN: When the thing, the operation, actually begins
and the landing has taken place, do you come
into it again at that point at any time?
LANSDALE: No.
O'BRIEN: You do become involved in Cuban affairs at a
later time.
LANSDALE: Later, yes.
O'BRIEN: When did you have any--with the (Maxwell) Taylor
committee which makes the inquiry about it?
LANSDALE: I met with them once, and they weren't interested
in the Bay of Pigs. They were interested
in the decision-making process, of making policy,
and asked me if I had any ideas on
how better the President could be served in
the policy decisions and arriving at them.
The thing was, right at that moment, McNamara
had previously asked me for the same thing,
and I had come up with a proposal for him,
which he put to Kennedy. I just told them,
"Well, I had some ideas but I had given them
to somebody else, and I was skeptical of the
boss anyhow, and this was on putting together
task forces. The Kennedy administration had
eliminated a bureaucratic boondoggling thing
O'BRIEN: and what the hell was that called?
LANSDALE: Yes, the OCB (Operations Coordinating Board).
I pointed out that the one
good thing about it was that the principals
met for lunch, and I said the rest of it's for the birds,
but to get men in who are talking
to, for managing men, money, and material and
so on, who can understand the problem well
enough around the lunch table to have one
secretary or deputy secretary or under secretary
say, well, we'll take care of that, a
good way of doing business, and with the
president's own national security man sitting
in on it, going back and telling him this is
going to happen for these reasons, why, it
was a good control mechanism. So essentially
all I told the Taylor people and told
McNamara in my paper was that this function had
been eliminated, along with cutting out a lot of
dead wood, and there was some live wood. How
about restoring the live wood? This essentially
was what my proposition was with the task force,
of getting the people most concerned with
something who could operate for the
president, and having them get together and
help form the policy, get the president's
approval, and they were the same ones who
could...not to create another big
bureaucratic thing. And of course, after they
first tried this, it rapidly started becoming
a big bureaucratic thing. The task forces
that were later set up were just big staffs
sitting in different buildings. It was
almost like OCB again, not quite, but it got
out of hand. Anytime you try to change the
government around, it seems to come right back
in form again and close ranks on it. But that
was all, I did with the Taylor group. Incidentally,
in that inquiry into the Cuban bit was
the first time that I met (Robert F.) Bobby
Kennedy. For some reason or other, I didn't
connect him personally with the pictures of
him and so on, on TV, and I wondered what the
youngster was doing sitting in the meeting
talking so much.
O'BRIEN: Was he pretty tough?
LANSDALE: Well, he wasn't tough. He was the most inter-
ested of anyone in the room there of what I
would say on things and plague me with many
questions.
O'BRIEN: How were his questions? Was he fairly naive
about the problems?
LANSDALE: Now, this was on problems--questions of how the
government would operate at a decision level,
and they weren't naive at all. He had a very
good understanding. He was very much concerned
about his brother's getting good service in the
way of information and full details of alterna-
tives and so on, on a policy decision.
O'BRIEN: Well, after the Bay of Pigs--of course you had a lot
of contacts and friendships in other places
outside the Pentagon. What kind of an impact
did the Bay of Pigs have, let's say over in
the Agency, and State Department, and in Defense,
and in the White House?
LANSDALE: It was a traumatic experience at top levels throughout
the government. I think it affected
President Kennedy more than any other single
thing. It was almost a taboo subject if you
were going in to do business and to get an
approval on something, over even hinted at. Such
a Cuban affair. It was an
intensely sore subject among all of these
people. I felt that almost all of the key
executives in the administration must have
dreamt about it at night or something, and
during the daytime working hours they just
didn't even want to contemplate it. And yet
they were honest enough people that they knew
they had to face up and look at it and would do
so, but it was an extremely emotional subject
with them, very much so.
O'BRIEN: Well, in terms of the Agency, there's a number
of programs and, of course, involvements in
operations that they have. Do you see any
shift in these, any attempt on the part of the
Defense Department to move into some of these
areas which they felt were traditionally theirs
rather than the Agency. I guess what I'm
trying to say is, can you see any decline in
the Agency's influence in the Agency's decisions?
LANSDALE: Yes, I think so. I'm not certain that it was
the military as such. It might have been the
encouragement of some of the military who
were somewhat interested but wouldn't really
have expressed the interest unless they were
directly asked, and there always had been some
feeling of uneasiness, I think would be the best
word to describe it, among the military about
any clandestine operations. They felt that
once it got over into guerrilla type of operations
or anything that would involve a military subject,
that it would be far better to let the military
establishment of the U.S. handle it. But that
would be sort of a dinner-cocktail party type of
a gambit on their part, rather than sitting and
planning and so on of "We must grab some of
this." Even though among themselves they talked
that way. They didn't express it in terms of
their attendance at policy councils or even in
talks with people like the Secretary of Defense
or the civilian executive side of Defense. On
this, I think that McNamara himself probably
started thinking initially that this was a
military operation and just to be more efficient
and effective, the military should take over
such things. I imagine that he talked that way
to some of the military people who were seeing
him from the JCS, and the Chiefs, and from the
intelligence community, the military intelligence
community. I know that DIA (Defense Intelligence
Agency) got its great start under McNamara, and
I feel almost certain, I've got a strong hunch,
that the Bay of Pigs and the misreading of the
temper of the people in Cuba gave McNamara
great impetus in setting that up initially.
So, actually, it wasn't a military ambition
to set up a rival intelligence agency to
CIA, though there had been tremendous rivalry
between the military service intelligence
agencies and the CIA and had been right along,
from the initiation of CIA originally. But this
was sort of a business rivalry, and it was
sort of dealing with them, of categories of
work, and where the boundary lines of who did
what on the thing, and this is where their
jealousies and emotions and everything would
come up over almost nitpicking of boundary lines
of who would do what. It wasn't a thing of
"we'll do it all, and you go out of business"--that
feeling hadn't come up--but very after the
Bay of Pigs, the DIA and its creation, a lot of
the people in that who were civilian employees,
Defense Department employees, had an idea, "We
can do a better job than CIA," and in a much
wider field than the service intelligence agencies
had done.
O'BRIEN: Are there enough skilled and competent people
around, in the universities and the military,
to staff all the intelligence agencies: the NSA
(National Security Agency), DIA, CIA, and organi-
zations? Are there enough people, or are these
operations just simply too big?
LANSDALE: Yes. They might be too big. The need to
know things is a very elastic bit. I'm certain
that the chief executive of the United States,
in whose name these works are accomplished,
would have no idea that he would ever desire
to know some of the things that they're working
on very hard--you discover whole buildings
and all sorts of equipment busily accumulating
facts. Dulles ever needing to know some
of that, and yet he would hesitate, given the
world today and the technological advances and
everything, it's very hard to say what you need
to know and what you don't. Given this sort of
a gray shading of the objectives on this
thing, it's very difficult to say whether you've
got too big an establishment or not.
O'BRIEN: Do you ever take this question up, or is this
question ever raised in the administration by the
civilian people in DOD (Department of Defense)
or the White House, with you?
LANSDALE: Not with me. No. My theme on overseas operations
was reiterated enough so that it was known by
a number of people, and I always felt that it was
more efficient and effective to have a very
small group working and to choose them with very
great selectivity and go for a handful of
highly qualified people rather than a large
group of Americans charging overseas someplace.
This went for intelligence as well as diplomatic
and other economic work, and so on. I used to
point out the embassies--for example, behind
the Iron Curtain--that would get decimated by
being TNT'd and so on, in Eastern Europe,
for example, it would happen that would wind up
with an ambassador and two or three people
left in an embassy, and their work would increase
in quality, and their representing U.S. interests
would seem to improve tremendously when that
would happen.
O'BRIEN: Does the fact that you get this reputation,
mainly out of the writings of guys like (Eugene)
Burdick and Graham Greene, does this affect you
in any way in your relations with the bureau-
cracy?
LANSDALE: Yes. It made life rather difficult. With
much of the work I had to do in Washington,
I came back from a lot of operations abroad
and went up into policy-forming levels in
Washington almost immediately, and into facing
people who were very sensitive on my presence
abroad initially. Since I didn't just stick
in a regular military category but would get
over into their own subject matter, this made
them very uncomfortable and I can understand
it while it happened, but it was carried to
too great an emotional length. At times I
would suggest certain individuals be sent to
look into a situation in a given country and
would arrange their transportation and so on,
and I would get backing throughout the U.S.
government for this thing, and have an individual
approved by the Secretary of State as well as
Defense and up at the White House and so on,
but would set up a means of communicating
back so that we would get reports back. There
would be times when these individuals would
show up in a country, and the first time they
sent a message to me, the ambassador would
ask them kindly to leave the country, to get
out of there, just because of my name. I was
apparently the enemy to some of these
people. One of my assistants was traveling
between Thailand and Saigon, and there was a
coup going on in Saigon at the time and his
plane, which was Air France, put down--commercial
flight--in Phnom Penh, in Cambodia, and the
military attaché very kindly picked up this
guy and several other Americans from the
plane and found a place for them to stay
until they could get another flight out of
Phnom Penh. He asked this lad of mine where
he'd worked, and he said, "In the Pentagon"--
he was a civilian employee--and he mentioned
that he worked for me, and the attaché got
all excited, called the ambassador, and he
was given two hours to come out of the country.
(Laughter) All he was doing was looking for
a place to sleep at night, so it became very
emotional and very silly, and detrimental to
the U.S. For example, once in Indonesia, in
meeting our folks around the embassy in
Djakarta, I had spotted an assistant army
attaché, who was the one American, along with
one of the economic mission guys--there were
two Americans who were not only best known
by the Indonesians but were respected, and
there was an affection there, and I have told
the ambassador at the time, afterwards, make
real use of these people, the Indonesians
believe them, and there's some antipathy towards
the U.S., but they make an exception to these
two, and they're just invaluable, but the army
man was extremely close to the general staff
of the Indonesians army. I went on some visits
to members at their homes of the Indonesian General
staff, and this lad who was tall and blond--
a Nordic type, if you will--would go in, and
the small brown Indonesians and their
families--welcome him like a long lost uncle
or brother or something. The children would
run up and jump in his arms and climb all over
him, and he was Uncle something to them.
So, later, when the Soviets start moving in
SAM (surface-to-air missile) missile sites into
Indonesia and the U.S. needed to know what
sort of antiaircraft armaments were going in,
our embassy couldn't get the answers to it.
I suggested that we get the State, Defense
sponsorship and send this one fellow who is
a lieutenant colonel over and just let him
stay a week or so. He'd go right in and
talk to his old friends, and they'd probably
tell him what the Soviets were up to. He
arrived there, the Indonesian general staff
took him out and showed him these sights and
asked him what he thought of them and so on
the first day he was there. That night he
got back, and wrote out a radio message and
asked the ambassador to send it to me, at
which point our ambassador told him to leave
the country.
O'BRIEN: Now, this was Jones?
LANSDALE: That was Jones, yes, and he said, "Well,
let me put that in the message," so I guess
I asked the Department of State, please let
Jones know that you're sponsoring this guy,
too, and there might be some more things that
he finds out that you need to know as much as
we do. So they told Jones just to sit back
and let him do that.
We have some wonderful Americans, and this
was what I was trying to do--to find out
which Americans have not only our interests
at heart but were enough interested in foreign
countries to really understand and have
really would be serving the best
interest of other countries in things. I'd
far rather see one man get in on something
like that than send a whole team in with all
sorts of things and sort of aggravate a
situation, than do something rather simple.
O'BRIEN: Almost sensitivity training.
LANSDALE: Incidentally, along these lines,
I've got a good story for your account.
O'BRIEN: Great.
LANSDALE: About the time of the Cuban Missile Crisis,
McNamara came back from a meeting at the
White House one day and asked me to provide
the means for President Kennedy to talk to
the Cuban people on TV. How the hell did I
know how to do that? He told me that he
wanted to do it within the next twenty-four
hours. Well, it didn't happen. I suspected
that it would take longer than that; I don't
know how you intrude on a TV station's
broadcasting and get the people in the
country to go immediately to their TV sets
and watch a program. I called scientists
in from all over the U.S., who were electronic
whizzes on this type of a subject, and our
intelligence people and everybody else I
could think of to get some information
together in a real crash basis. CIA couldn't
give me details on technical details on any
of the TV stations in Havana and elsewhere.
None of the Defense civilian scientists--and I
can't think of his name offhand, East European
name--left the room and came back ten minutes
later and provided all the technical infor-
mation to the great amazement of everybody
there. And I said, "Where the hell did you
get that?" and he said, "Well, I went out to
the corridor in the Pentagon (where we were
having the meeting), sat in one of the phone
booths there, and I called a friend of mine
down in Havana who operates a TV station
and asked him. He gave me all the dope, and
I just wrote it down." So this is the way
we got the information for it. The intrusion
of the TV space never took place, but we
got the means together and some airborne TV
transmitters. It was developed finally by the
Navy, and the project--I've asked it to put on
a sort of sled so that it could be picked up
and changed over from one aircraft to another,
or used elsewhere later when we started the
TV broadcasts in Vietnam, this Navy equip-
ment that was initially intended to let
President Kennedy talk to the Cubans.
O'BRIEN: Why didn't it come off?
LANSDALE: It took us too long to figure ways of getting
in on the theme and finding a channel and
finding a way of getting people to do that.
It took us then, twelve days to do it, and the
time for them to do it had passed over, and
the Russians stood down in the interim, so the
need had passed.
O'BRIEN: Well, how do you come back into...well,
maybe, perhaps we ought to pursue this whole
business of counterinsurgency first. It sort
of becomes the thing with the Kennedy admin-
istration, doesn't it?
LANSDALE: Yes.
O'BRIEN: How do you see that? I was in the Marine
Corps in the late 50s, and there was a good
deal of guerrilla and counterguerrilla training
that was going on, and it becomes a part of
the new administration. Who are the principle
proponents of this, outside of yourself? Do
you have any conversations, say, with Bobby--
well, you don't really see Bobby until after
April. But do you have any conversations with
the president, let's say, meeting with him
about this?
LANSDALE: No, no, I didn't. I don't know who talked to him
about this. When he came in office, this was
already one of his themes, where he picked
that up originally, I don't know. I was
rather surprised--he seemed to have seen
copies of lectures and other things that
I've given on the subject, but who had
passed those to him and who had talked to
him about it, I just don't know.
O'BRIEN: Let's say, let's take a person like Max Taylor.
Do you have anything in the way of conversations
with Max Taylor in the late fifties?
LANSDALE: No.
O'BRIEN: How about the rest of the Joint Chiefs?
LANSDALE: No. Taylor was opposed to this type of thing.
He did quite a considerable switch, see? He
was about the last person I would have ever
picked to have headed up something the way
Kennedy asked him to do it.
O'BRIEN: That's what I was wondering about, Taylor's
role in this whole thing. He is opposed.
LANSDALE: Well, he was the one that in the very early
formation of the Special Forces in the Army--
he was Chief of Staff of the Army at the time--
and took one look at these American troops in
green berets and said, "Take that God damn silly
headgear off," or "Take that--that's it." No
green berets, and he ruled that out of
the thing. He wasn't too happy with a special
unit of that nature. But at the time, it was
He went along with the concept that
it was only a wartime outfit, that somebody
would have to go and jump in and work with
guerrillas.