178-10003-10016
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
8/27/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ROCKCOM
RECORD NUMBER:
178-10003-10016
RECORD SERIES:
ASSASSINATION FILE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: ASSASSINATION MATERIALS--MISC. ROCK/CIA (10)
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
FROM:
CIA
TO:
TITLE:
MINUTES OF MEETING OF THE SPECIAL GROUP, 30 AUGUST 1962
DATE:
08/30/1962
PAGES:
4
SUBJECTS
CUBA
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW
OPENING CRITERIA
COMMENTS:
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
Consulted
Withhold
07/15/1993
v9.1
25
NW 50955 DocId:32204599 Page 1
178-10003-10016
PROPERTY
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD
30 August 1962
SUBJECT: Minutes of Meeting of the Special Group, 30 August 1962.
SEL. Gun ral Taylor, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Cilpatric, General Carter,
General Lemnitzer, and Hr. Bundy
Colonel Steakley was present for Items 1-3.
Mr. Pford Herbert was present for Items 4-6.
R.
GERALD
FORD LIBRARY
PHOTOCOPY FROM THE GERALD R. FORD LIBPARY
Reconnaissance
1.
A.
DOD Peripheral Flights
The peripheral flights were approved as presented. It was
noted that LOLLY would involve only a single aircraft as opposed to
the previous two plane flights in this area. As to LUCETTE and MICHELE,
it was pointed out that these flights would not be flown while the
Soviet niclear test prohibited zone was still in effect. In response
to a question from Mr. Johnson as to why these flights were 40 rather
than 50 miles off the coast, Colonel Steakley said that the distance
selected was a variable, depending on the purpose of the flight and
other conditions.
B. Laos
Generel Taylor asked if anyone cared to reopen this inatter.
Mr. Gilpatric presented the Defense position. In view of the Soviet
transport circraft stand down and the indications that the Communists
were at least going through the motions of carrying out the agreement,
Defense was in favor of not reopening the matter until the 75 day
withdrawal period was over and an evaluation had been made of the degree
of Communist compliance. General Lemnitzer, while willing to taka the
risk of waiting, said he would like to make it clear that from the
military point of view it was most important that we have good informa-
tion on Communist activities. These flights are our prime source of
hard Information. The consensus of the Group was that this subject would
not be reopened until after the 75 day withdrawal period was over.
c.
Overflighte of South Laos
(1) Colonel Steakley pointed out that there was one problem..
AL
in connection with flat prohibition on photo flights over Laos,
present, RF-101's based in Thailand must overfly the southern panhandle
NW 50955 DocId: 32204599 Page 2
UNMARKED
NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
PHOTOCOPY FROM THE GERALD R. FORD LIBPARY
:
110
GERALD
LIBRARY
enroute to execute missions in South Vietnam. He proposed that the
general policy te modliled to permit high altitude overflights (35,000
feet) to and from South Vietnam, by planes based in Thailand.
It was
brought out that the average activity level was about two missions about
every three days. There was agreement that photo reconnaissance in
general against guerrilla targets was difficult but that this made it
all the more important to do all that we can, These flights are
essentially covert; as, current agreements preclude the filing of flight
plans for photo aircraft. Mir. Johnson said that the Department was
willing to go along with this activity, but felt that the matter had
to be reviewed by higher authority cue to his very explicit previous
instructions to the contrary. The Group's decision to approve this
specific exception to the prohibition against photo flighte over Laos
was later reported to higher authority.
(2) In discussing the matter above, the desirability of
redeploying the aircraft to South Vietria was mentioned. This matter
was referred to Defense for further examination. It was also recognized
that the South Vietnamese might well be given some indigenous capability
for photo reconnaissance. It was also suggested that possible Laos
overflights, after the 75 day period had clapsed, wight well be put in
the standard overfligat category rather than being handied as a separate
item.
D. The ELINT flights from Thailand were discussed and approved
with the understanding that they would use the specific routes indicated
Ε.
General
The Agency's monthly forecast wes reviewed and noted. All
of the flights contained therein had been previously approved.
Carter mentioned that there might be an additional requirement for
flights over Cuba.
F.
The destroyer surveillance mission DESOTO was discussed and
approved. It was pointed out that the ship generally operates 20 miles
offshore, but closes to 12 miles under certain conditions. The Group
requested that they be informed if any of the various ELINT operations
picked up unusual indications.
G.
The Group reviewed certain submarine activition and approved
them as presented.
2. Resupply of the Neos
General Carter raised the question of exactly how approval should
be obtained for arus and ammunition resupply missions to the Keos. It
was agreed that this was a matter for consultation between the Department
of State and CLA, and need not be referred to the Group for decision.
NW 50955 DocId: 32204599 Page 3
1
4
PHOTOCOPY FROM THE GERALD R. FORD LIBPARY
3.
Soviet Signal Intelligence Ships
The Grono considered an outline plan for "communication" with
Communist crews. The general consensus was that this plan did not
fall within the purview of the Special Group. It was referred back
to C3 for further development. The matter will be discussed at a
State-JCS meeting to be held in the near future. Mr. Gilpatric also
expressed interest in seeing a more detailed development of the con-
cept. Mr. Bundy pointed out that we should be careful where such
activities are pursued. Generally speaking, they should be limited to
the high seas or international air space. General Carter raised the
point that this concept should not be stretched to include defection
operations on land. This is a highly skilled operation which requires
special attention and control. The Group took no particular position
for or against the concept in referring it back to Defonso.
4.
Chile
The Group reviewed the two Agency papers. Mr. Johnson stressed
the necessity for concealing U.S. participation in this operation and
also expressed some concern about the possibility of the Radicals
palling out prematurely and bringing the government down. The Agency
mentioned the desirability of policy-level conversations with suitable
Chileans so that they would be aware of the future political arrange-
ments which it is felt would be to the common interests of Chile and
the United States. The Group approved the recommendation in paragraph
5 on page 7.
5.
Dominican Republic
The Group noted this paper. Cenoral Carter urged the Department
of State to continue to press the interim goverment on the desirability
of holding early elections.
6. Parama
Mr. Johnson said that State concurred in the general thrust of
this paper, but would like to limit the continuation of the program to
a three-month period during which time it would be reviewed in detail by
State and CIA. The Group approved the proposal with this reservation.
7.
General Lemnitzer stated that Mr. McCone had called him and posed
a possible requirement for low-level photography of critical Cuban
targets. General Laanitzer said that from the military point of view
this was feasible, utilizing either AF-101 or FSU aircraft flown by
U.S. pilots from various banes of carriers in the Caribbean area.
Tuo
NW 50955 DocId: 32204599 Page 4
EVES GILY
s
vrrive
use of Cutan pilots would involve a delay of some months due to the
precise training required. General Carter pointed out that we are
of overflichta in any case and that the possibility
of Can protests should not dissuade us from making these flights
are recessar٧٠ 1: was pointed out that other types at photo-
not give
ment.
rapy, le setul to pinpointing critical targets, dor
sufficient detail for precise identitication of certain types of equip
After some discussion, the Group agreed to take cognizance of
chis matter and requested that it be reopsid at an appropriate time
witen specific targets and information neers could be identified.
8. It was agreed that the Agency would present a paper concerning
Action Against North Vietnan at next week's meeting.
PHOTOCOPY FROM THE GERALD R. FORD LIBRARY
**
**
General Taylor did not have an opportunity to review these minutes
prior to his departure.
R
FORD LIBRARY
GERALD
Julian J. Everl
Colonel, USA
Distribution
Mr. Jen so
Mr. Gilpatric
General Carter
General Taylor
NW 50955 DocId:32204599 Page 5

