178-10002-10091
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
8/31/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ROCKCOM
RECORD NUMBER: 178-10002-10091
RECORD SERIES: SCHWARZER-MANFREDI FILES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: S-M (IV-W)
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION
FROM:
ΤΟ:
TITLE: DEPOSITION OF WILLIAM C. STURBITTS
DATE: 04/16/1975
PAGES: 113
SUBJECTS:
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
ASSASSINATIONS, FOREIGN LEADERS
CIA
CLANDESTINE OPERATIONS
CUBAN EXILES
FERRIE, DAVID
STURGIS, FRANK
HUNT, E. HOWARD
MIAMI
NEW ORLEANS
SHAW, CLAY
STURBITTS, WILLIAM C.
GARRISON, JIM
DOCUMENT TYPE: DEPOSITION
CLASSIFICATION: Secret
RESTRICTIONS: 1A; IB; IC
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 02/13/2001
OPENING CRITERIA: Unknown whether name is releasable.
COMMENTS:

SECRET
CONTENTS
Deposition of
Examination by Counsel
For the Commission
William C. Sturbitts
(AFTERNOON SESSION Page 58)
William C. Sturbitts (Resumed)
178-10002-10091
178-10002-10215
178-10002-10279
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION
ON CIA ACTIVITIES
Langley, Virginia
Wednesday, April 16, 1975
Deposition of WILLIAM C. STURBITTS, called for
examination by Counsel for the Commission on CIA Activities,
the witness being duly sworn by Thomas C. Hogan, a Notary
Public in and for the State of Virginia, in the offices of the
Central Intelligence Agency, Langley, Virginia, at 9:50
o'clock a.m., on Wednesday, April 16, 1975, the proceedings
being taken down in stenotype by Ruth G. McClenning, and
transcribed under her direction.
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Commission:
GEORGE MANFREDI, ESQ.,
ROBERT B. OLSEN, ESQ.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
PROCEEDINGS
Thereupon,
WILLIAM C. STURBITTS,
called as a witness by Counsel for the Commission on CIA
Activities, and having been first duly sworn by the Notary
Public, was examined and testified as follows:
EXAMINATION BY COUNSEL FOR THE COMMISSION
BY MR. MANFREDI:
Q Mr. Sturbitts, will you state your full name for the
record?
A William C. Sturbitts.
Q Mr. Sturbitts, do you recall when we spoke some
weeks ago you signed a document entitled, "Advice and
Waiver"?
A Right.
Q You understand that document is still in effect?
A Sure.
Q Mr. Sturbitts, by whom are you currently employed?
You mean the Agency or
Q That is right.
A Central Intelligence Agency.
Q And what is your current position with the Agency?
A I am a Special Assistant, Latin America, for
Economic Intelligence Collection and operations.
Q And would you briefly review for me the history of
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
your employment with the Agency?
A When I first came in I was in the Intelligence
Directorate for approximately ten years and I was put on special
detail, special indefinite detail, in the Deputy Director, Plans,
which is now the Directorate of Operations.
Q What year were you put on that detail?
A I guess it was 1964, January, I believe.
Q And what did that detail involve?
A Cuban operations, economic warfare.
Q And how long were you on that detail?
A I was in the Cuban operations for nine years.
Q Between 1964 and 1973?
A (Nods in affirmative.)
Q And in 1973 did you assume your current position?
A Yes, January.
Q Now, while you were on special detail to the DOD?
A Yes.
Q Were you stationed in Washington?
A Yes.
Q And did you commute with some frequency to Miami?
A Yes.
Q Were your activities in Miami in any way connected
with the operations of the Miami Station?
A In some way. My responsibilities were worldwide.
I took temporary duty predominantly in Europe, and then Miami.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Most of my operations were run out of Europe.
Q Run out of --
A Europe. Some were run out of Miami but the big ones
were run out of Europe.
Q Well, in the course of your activities with respect
to Cuba did you have occasion to become familiar with the
operations of the Miami base?
A Yes.
Q And the situation in the Cuban community in Miami?
A Yes, sir.
Q During the nine years you were with DDO's Cuban
operations, who was who were the chiefs of the Miami
Station?
A I think in 1963 Ted Shackley was the Chief and he
was followed by I can't think of his name. I should know
it. Well, I will come back to that.
Q Then, the next Chief of Station was Paul Henze.
What years was he Chief?
A I think Paul was there about a year and a half. He
left in 1968 when we reduced the size of the Station. Let's
say Henze was there from 1966 to 1968. And then Jake Esterline.
He was Chief of Station from 1968 to 1973.
Q Now, what was the formal title of the group to which
you were assigned for the 9-year period?
A Well, when I first came in it was known as the
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Special Activities Staff. It was headed by Desmond Fitzgerald.
And then, I believe after that it became the Cuban Operations
Group.
Q Now, was this a special group within the DDO or was
it attached to one of the area divisions?
A No. Following the Bay of Pigs, they created a thing
called Task Force W which was headed by Bill Harvey. And
that -- when Harvey left, he went to Chief of Station, Rome,
and Fitzgerald took over, it became Special Activities Staff.
It wasn't attached to anything except it reported to the
Deputy Director, Plans.
Q And that was Mr. Karamessines?
A Yes. Well, it was Helms at that time back when it
was first created. Helms was DDP at that time.
Q And Task Force W was created immediately after the
Bay of Pigs?
A Well, not immediately. I think sometime around
in the Bay of Pigs was in April. I think this was created in
September, something like that, 1961.
Q And that subsequently became the Special Activities
Staff?
A Special Activities Staff and consequently became the
Cuban Operations Group. As the Cuban Operations Group it went
back into the Western Hemisphere Division.
Q And what was the date of that reorganization?
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
A Well, let's see. I would say that was probably around
1965 because Fitzgerald then became Chief, W.H., and then
later DDP.
Q Now, Mr.Harvey -- do you recall what position Mr.
Harvey held after he left Task Force W?
A Yes. He was Chief of Station, Rome.
Q And is he still with the Agency?
A Oh, no. He retired a long time ago.
Q Do you know where he lives at the present time?
A Frankly, I don't. I have an idea where he lives.
He went to work for a friend of mine who had a law firm.
Harvey is a lawyer.
Q Indianapolis area?
A Yes, some place around there. It is in the midwest,
Indiana.
Q What was the role that was assigned to Task Force
W?
A It was the overall Cuban operations.
Q Did the Miami -- when was the Miami Station estab-
lished?
A Well, I think they had a forward operatio-s base down
there about 1960 which was small, in Coral Gables.
Q This was, then, prior to the Bay of Pigs?
A Oh, yes.
Q Now, in addition to Task Force W, was the Miami
Station running any operations against Cuba?
A You mean prior to the Bay of Pigs?
Q Yes.
A I really don't know. It was a small -- it was a
forward base and it was more or less as I recall, a support type
thing.
Q Well, after the Bay of Pigs when Task Force W was
established, did it have sole responsibility for Cuban
operations?
A Yes.
Q Or was that shared with the Miami base, Miami
Station?
A No. The Miami Station was under Task Force W.
Q All right. Would that also be true of the Special
Activities Staff, the Cuban Operations Group?
A Right, except that at the present time the Station
has no Cuban operations.
Q I understand that. When were Cuban operations termi-
nated?
A At the Station? Let's see. Sternfield went down
there in 1972. It was during fiscal year '72. I think it was
in early 1973. It was a gradual reduction.
Q And have those operations been terminated entirely
or are they now run out of the Washington area?
A All Cuban operations are run out of Washington.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
There are no more paramilitary operations, that type of thing.
Q But there are some Cuban operations being run out of
the Washington area?
A Right.
Q Is that correct?
A Right. Worldwide.
Q Mr.Sturbitts, in the last couple of weeks you may
have seen some allegations in the press about possible assassina-
tion attempts that have been mounted or alleged assassination
attempts that have been mounted --
A Right.
Q against Fidel Castro. In the course of your
activities with respect to Cuba, did you ever learn of any such
attempts?
A Well, let me answer it this way. I wouldn't say
attempts. I know there was discussion. "Attempts" is too
strong a word.
Q Well, can you place in time your first knowledge of
any such discussions?
A Well, the first knowledge I had of any discussions,
I was on TDY and this was October, November, 1963, with Fitzgerald
in Paris. And I knew that he was going to meet let me put
it another way. I had overheard that discussions were going on
with a member of Castro's military but that he wanted, as
I recall, he wanted some British I mean Belgian rifles and
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
a telescopic sight.
Q Who wanted them?
A This military guy that was in Fidel's -- I think
at one time he was a commandante. Now, I knew that was going
on. I didn't participate in it because I was there for another
reason. And I know that subsequent to that time that Fitzgerald
met with him again and as I recall, as the personal representa-
tive of the Attorney General, Bobby Kennedy.
Q I provided all those files. There are 19 volumes that
we gave to your people. But I don't know who was reviewing
them. I think Belin was going to do it himself.
Q Yes. He is. He is doing it himself.
Q You said there were 19 volumes of documents with
respect to this.
A 19 files, manila.
Q All having to do with possible assassination?
A All having to do with this whole time period and --
Q Can we go off the record for a minute?
(Discussion off the record.)
BY MR. MANFREDI:
Q The first knowledge of such conversations that you
had, I take it you obtained on a trip to Europe with Mr.
Fitzgerald?
A I simply overheard it, that is right.
Q And who were the parties to the conversation you over-
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
heard?
A A fellow named Nestor Sanchez.
Q And Mr. Fitzgerald?
A Yes, and I really can't recall some of the other
people. We were -- we had just moved the Station at that time,
in Paris, out of the Embassy into the old Rothschild Palace
and we felt that it was probably bugged, so all conversations
took place -- we walked around the garden and that type of
thing, and, you know, I was walking with somebody, somebody
was in front of me, and you just overhear conversations.
Q This was in Paris?
A Yes.
Q I see.
Q Mr. Sanchez -- was he a member of the military?
A No. Mr. Sanchez was in the Special Activities Staff.
He was stationed in Washington. And he was in contact with
Cuban military-type.
Q Was it your understanding that the Agency had received
instructions with respect to this activity from another
component of the Government?
A Well, let me put it this way. I don't know whether
they received instructions. I have to assume, and I am pretty
positive, that this was a result of a Special Group decision.
And at this time you have to remember that Bobby Kennedy was
overseeing this deal, presumably for his brother, and he was
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
part of that Special Group. He called the meetings, he presided
-- he did a number of things.
Q Were there any other occasions that you can recall
in which the possibility or the subject of assassination of
Fidel Castro was discussed?
A No, not really.
Q You referred to this as the first occasion.
A This is the first --
Q Was there a second?
A The first time I knew about it or even heard it
discussed.
Q Well, prior to the investigation that is currently
underway -- I am referring now to our Commission's investigation
-- were there any other occasions in which this subject came
to your attention after this discussion in the garden in
Paris?
A The only other thing that came to my attention was
that the decision was made not to provide him with this sight
that he wanted. Whether that is right or wrong, I don't know,
but that is what I was told.
Q When did you learn that?
A Oh, I would assume in -- must have been early 1964,
around February, something like that.
Q Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
MR. MANFREDI: On the record.
BY MR. MANFREDI:
Q Mr. Sturbitts, are you familiar with a gentleman by
the name of Frank Sturgis?
A Indeed.
Q Is your familiarity based on what you have read in
the press?
A No. It is what is contained in the files.
Q Have you caused a search to be made of CIA files,
particularly the files of the Western Hemisphere Division,
in an attempt to determine whether Mr. Sturgis ever had any
connection with the Agency?
A I have.
Q What were the results of that search?
A Absolutely no connection, never has been.
Q When we talk about connection, are we talking about
an employment relationship?
A That is what I am speaking of.
Q Was Mr.Sturgis ever an independent contractor of
the Agency?
A No.
Q Was he ever a contract employee?
A No.
Q Was he ever a regular employee of the Agency?
A No.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Q Had he ever hired to do any piecework for the
Agency?
A Not to my knowledge.
Q Do you know whether or not Mr. Sturgis ever partici-
pated in any type of paramilitary or other operation against
Cuba?
A On his own behalf he did, not on behalf of this
Agency.
Q How did you learn of those operations?
A Through the newspaper. And through FBI reports.
Q Now, are these recent FBI reports?
A Oh, no. These go back -- I know at one time, the
thing that comes to mind, I think he made a leaflet drop
over Cuba and this was subsequently reported in the press and
by the Bureau office in Miami.
Q Do you know who financed his activities?
A I have no idea.
Q Is it possible that Mr. Sturgis' activities were
indirectly financed by the Agency through --
A I don't see how. Frank Sturgis is a soldier of
fortune; has been. He has constantly tried to associate himself
with the Agency. When I went through his file they wanted me
to classify the file and the way I classified it was "don't
destroy it, he is an intelligence nuisance."
Q Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
MR. MANFREDI: On the record.
BY MR. MANFREDI:
Q Have you caused the Agency records with respect to Mr.
Sturgis to be assembled in any one location?
A Yes. I have custody of them.
Q And what is the volume of that material?
A As I recall, there are five volumes. Your Committee
called for them the other day after the article in the paper,
I guess it was last Saturday. They called for them Monday and
they returned them Monday afternoon.
Q Do you know who examined those files?
A No, I don't.
Q You indicated a moment ago that Mr. Sturgis contacts
the DCD office in Miami with some frequency, is that correct?
A Well, not great frequency but he does with tidbits
of so-called information.
Q Is this information limited to narcotics, alleged
narcotics traffic?
A Recently it has been.
Q Has Mr. Sturgis been encouraged by the DCD office
in Miami?
A Mr. Sturgis has been told by the DCD office in Miami
to take his information to the Drug Enforcement Agency or the
FBI.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Q Do you know whether or not they consider him an
established contact?
A No manner.
Q Do they have any -- do they periodically seek to
collect information from Mr. Sturgis?
A I can't speak to that but the records that we have
don't reflect anything like that. Before they would contact
somebody in that context, knowing that there is a 201 file
on Sturgis, they would have to coordinate with the Latin
American Division before they did anything since we do hold
the file.
Q Would you briefly explain what a 201 file is?
A A 201 file is a personnel file. It consists of any
information relating to an individual appearing in the press
as a result of other agency reporting and that type of thing.
Q Personnel or personality file?
A Personality file, I should say. Excuse me.
Q Do you know whether or not there is any connection
or relationship between Eugenio Martinez and Mr. Sturgis?
A Well, I will say this. Obviously, they do know
each other. They have to know each other from their days
in Cuba.
Q Do you know whether or not Mr. Sturgis ever partici-
pated with Martinez in raids against Cuba?
A No. As I recall, we employed Martinez around 1961,
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
I guess, and he was in our maritime activities. He was a
boat captain eventually. And he did participate in infiltrations
and exfiltrations and perhaps one or two raids, hit and run,
sabotage-type actions against Cuba. Sturgis never engaged in
any of these things. He never did it for us nor did he ever
do it on any of our boats, planes, or -- anything that belongs
to the Agency.
Q When Martinez would run such an operation or captain
a boat on such an operation, would he be charged with putting
together his own crew?
A No. He had an assigned crew and every boat had a
Case Officer operating either out of the -- probably out of
the Miami Station. Sometimes I would assume that we did have
some people in the Key West base. But he, Martinez, would receive
his instructions and briefings from his Case Officer.
Q So it is likely that he could have brought Sturgis
along on any of these operations?
A Absolutely unlikely. Oh, the guy whose name I was
trying to think of, Chief of Station, John Dimmer.
Q And that would be for a period of time between
Shackley and Henze?
A Yes.
Q 1964 to 1966?
A Something like that.
Q Would you describe briefly for me the nature of the
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
activities conducted by the Special Activities Staff during
your -- and subsequently the Cuban Operations Group during
your 9-year tenure with those groups.
A Well, there was -- it was an across-the-board
intelligence operation consisting of collection of foreign
positive intelligence, counterintelligence, paramilitary
activities, covert action, economic activities. That is about
the breadth of the thing.
Q Now, these were all conducted through the DDO?
A Right.
Q Now, let's speak for a moment about the paramilitary
operations. Were these operations run out of southern
Florida?
A Right.
Q And in particular out of the Miami Station?
A Yes.
Q Were there any other CIA facilities in that area of
the country that participated in these activities?
A Not to my knowledge.
Q Were there any southern harbors other than Miami
that were used in these activities?
A Well, we had activities down in the Keys also. As
I said, we did have a Key West base.
Q Were there any other bases in that area of the
country that were utilized in these operations?
A Well, not that I would call a base. We did have
training facilities for the UDT teams.
Q What is a UDT team?
A Underwater demolition.
Q Where were those bases located?
A I frankly don't know. They were down along the Keys,
along that long peninsula going down there. There were a
number of sites. I really can't recall them.
Q Were there any other sites within the United States
in which paramilitary training was conducted, for people
participating in these activities?
A Not to my knowledge.
Q Where were these people trained?
A What do you mean?
Q Well, Cubans who participated in these activities.
A We trained them at these places we had in the Keys.
Now, there also some of them were brought up here and trained
at the Domestic Training Station.
Q Where is that located?
A That is down in Virginia.
Q Were any CIA personnel actually involved in these
raids?
A Occasionally, I would think that -- you have got to
understand at this time that we had a great many contract
employees, independent contractors and this type of thing.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Most of the paramilitary operations and the training was
conducted by the Special Operations Group which is another
entity of the --
Q DDO?
A DDO.
Q Now, the facilities that we have been talking about,
training facilities, were manned, then, by the Special
Operations Group, or at least supervised by the Special
Operations Group, is that correct?
A Well, supervised, yes, and I would think that probably
some of the training was given by their people. The Domestic
Training Station is under the Office of Training and -- but I
would think that in the paramilitary field that the SOG would
probably staff the training facility with their people who have
the expertise in paramilitary operations.
Q Now, were the people that were being trained at
these facilities basically Cuban refugees?
A Yes.
Q And at the outset I take it not many of those people
were American citizens?
A No.
Q Or had become American citizens.
A I would assume a great many have.
Q By this time.
A By this time, yes.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Q At the present time, how large is that Cuban community
in Miami? Do you have any idea?
A Well, it is extremely large. I would think it is
probably -- I was trying to think. I would say up towards a
military -- people.
Q You spoke about paramilitary operations and covert
action. How do you distinguish between those two categories
of activities?
A Well, actually one can fall into the other. The
paramilitary could fall into covert action but in those days
we did distinguish somewhat. A lot of the covert action was
media placement. We had a number of operations at -- legal-
type operations, harassment operations. For instance, Fidel
seized a great many art treasures and in particular he had a
Napoleonic collection which was supposed to be the finest in
the world that he sold to dealers in Europe. He had paintings
that were immensely valuable that he tried to have auctioned
in London and the London auctioneer would not accept them
because he obviously didn't have clear title to them. He was
-- they were stolen, in the eyes of the auctioneer. He was
forced to auction them in Toronto, Canada.
We ran legal operations, got the owners and had them
hire attorneys and bring them to court and this type of thing.
He seized these race horses. He tried to peddle them
in Europe and up in Canada. We ran opposition against that
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
type of thing.
Q These were what you considered to be covert operations?
A Yes, covert action.
Q Now, this is what you were referring to, legal-
type operations?
A Yes.
Q You used legal process to harass Castro.
A Yes.
Q What other types of harassment activities did you
run that would fall under this covert action category?
A Well --
Q Would economic warfare be --
A That was sort of something separate unto itself.
This was -- the economic warfare aspect of this thing was a
decision of the Special Group to enforce an economic blockade.
Q What special group is that?
A It is now called the Forty Committee.
Q Is that 302 Committee?
A Well, it was a 302 at one time, too. First of all,
it was called the Special Group, CI, Counterinsurgency. Then
it went to the 302 and then it had another name in between
there and now it is the Forty Committee.
Q All right. We will return to that a little bit
later, but what other types of harassment were you running
against Castro --
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
A This is what I was trying to think of.
Q that would be considered covert action?
A Well, as I say, a lot of propaganda, press placement,
media placement. It has been so long ago I really don't
remember. I know we had a number of things going against him.
We used suasion, moral suasion, otherwise. We did some
extra-legal things. We tried to get to his sources of supply,
particularly when they were countries that we had treaties
with, NATO countries, Canada, this type of thing.
Q Let's talk about each of those in turn. You said
you used moral suasion. What kind of activities are you
referring to?
A Well, in the moral suasion field we -- actually, we
were the catalyst in this whole thing and we had the legal
activities, the legal -- well, I don't know how you would
phrase it, but we operated under the Cuban access control
regulations of the Treasury Department, the Trading with the
Enemy Act, and we also used the facilities of the Department of
Commerce, the Export Control people.
Q I guess as you are aware, Cuban industry was totally
U.S.-oriented. As parts began wearing out and this type of
thing, Castro had his little people there running around trying
to place orders with subsidiaries of U.S. companies. Where
we would find this out through all-source intelligence, we
or the Treasury people or the Commerce people would go to the
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
executives of these American companies and ask them to tell
their foreign subsidiaries not to provide the spare parts
and the other things that Castro might need. We had the
Department of Commerce -- we identified 600 of the major U.S.
companies that could provide spare parts for Cuban industry.
We had the Department of Commerce send letters to those 600
manufacturers and ask them to cooperate with them in denying
any spare parts to the Cubans. This was a fairly concentrated
effort to really isolate them.
Q All right. And that is what you were referring to
as moral suasion?
A Yes.
Q Anything else in that category?
A Not really. None that I can think of.
Q Did you make the same kind of efforts with foreign
companies?
A At one point we did but it was absolutely useless,
the point in case being the Leyland buses. We pulled all stops
to stop that sale. The British Government turned us down
flat.
Q Now, did you attempt to reach any other sources of
supply?
A Well, we also had what we call a preemptive purchasing
program. If there was a single source of supply for a
particular item we would go in and buy it to deny the Cubans
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
the market.
Q Would that then be re-sold somewhere on the domestic --
A Yes.
Q -- domestic market?
A No. It would be re-sold abroad.
Q In all cases?
A The cases that I was associated with, it was all
sold abroad.
Q What kind of purchases were made?
A Well, we purchased at one point -- we purchased
some Bright Stock in Antwerp.
Q What?
A Bright Stock.
Q What is that?
A Heavy, heavy oil, and since Cuba -- 85 percent of
her energy comes from oil, this was considered a critical
commodity. Bright Stock can be -- oh, it is almost like tar,
melted tar, and it can be cut into additives, lubricants, this
type of thing, and this was critical to the Cuban economy. So
we had an oil firm purchase this Bright Stock from a dealer for
which we reimbursed the guy and the Bright Stock was eventually
sold in Africa.
Q Do you know of any sales of such materials that
were made within the United States?
A No. Resales, I should say.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Q In addition to preemptive buying were there any
other actions taken by this group with respect to sources of
supply to Cuba?
A Well, we did provide through third country agents
who got orders for Cuban goods, in collusion with the Commerce
Department, and I would assume the Special Group, we had
replacement parts manufactured that were substandard.
Q And you had them sold through foreign companies?
A Well, we had our agents get the Cuban orders all
over Europe. Then they would come back and, as a matter of fact,
the former Secretary of Commerce, who is on your Committee, Desi,
and I met him and he gave us the go-ahead to do this.
Q Mr. Dillon?
A No. He was Secretary of the Treasury.
Q But --
A But you must remember that these American --
Q Mr. Connors?
A Yes. But you must remember these American manufacturers,
well, their places were nationalized and they were only too
happy to work with us. And actually, it was a cash deal, bona
fide business. These things were transshipped through two
or three countries, finally wound up in Havana.
Q You referred to some extra-legal activities.
A Yes. That is what I was trying to think of, what
we did. I just can't think -- I remember this was on one of
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
our activities but I just can't think -- I remember this was
on one of our activities but I just can't remember what the
extra-legal was. I just can't remember what it was. I know
it was one of the parts of the program.
Q This was illegal activities? Is that what you are
referring to?
A Well, I wouldn't say they were illegal, but they
weren't exactly legal, I don't think. Perhaps they were in a
gray area some place.
Q Well, whose laws are we talking about, international
law, the laws of the United States?
A I would have to go back and review the thing. I
really can't remember this. I would have to go to the files.
Q Where could we find that kind of thing in the files?
A I would think probably down in the Records Center some
place.
Q Would it be possible to obtain that material some
time during the lunch hour?
A No. It is forty miles away.
Q Well, is there some place in the building where
you could refresh your memory?
A Not to my knowledge. All that stuff has been shipped.
This is talking 11 years ago, 12 years ago. All that material
has been retired.
Q What category of activity would we be talking about
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
when we refer to extra-legal activities?
A This is what I was trying to think of and I can't
think of what it was. I know extra-legal activities was one
parts of the program that we were involved in.
Q I might have a chart in my safe downstairs that might
tell me what that is.
Q Well, let's make a note of that and we will have to
come back to that.
A All right.
Q Who else would be knowledgeable about extra-legal
activities that were run against Castro?
A Well, the people that would be knowledgeable are
probably retired and I was running the program. So I ran
the economic program.
Q Well, these are activities that were run in connection
with the economic program?
A Yes.
Q We talked about media placement during this nine-
year period. To what are you referring when you refer to
media placement?
A Well, stories or news items that perhaps our
propaganda people wrote. We had them placed in newspapers
and magazines throughout the world.
Q Would this also include broadcasts over radio
stations?
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
A Oh, yes. Radio is a very big part of it.
Q Now, were any of these newspapers or magazines
published within the United States?
A Not to my knowledge, no.
Q These were essentially foreign publications?
A Yes.
Q Were any of them published in the Cuban community
in Miami?
A No. The intent was to get world opinion against
Castro. You don't do that by publishing in the United States.
Q What about the radio broadcasts? How were those
handled?
A Are you speaking of Radio Swan now?
Q Well, I am unfamiliar with how many radio stations
were involved. Was there more than one radio station?
A No. We only had the one radio station but we did
contract time with Florida stations, a station in New York.
Q For broadcasts to what areas?
A For broadcasts to Havana.
Q And the station in New York, was that received also
-- was that also broadcasting to various areas of the United
States?
A I have no idea. I don't know whether they used a
particular frequency to get this out or whether they did it
on short-wave or what they did.
Photocopy from
Gerald Ford Library
SECRET
Q But the intention was to reach Cuba.
A Reach Cuba.
Q You referred to a station in New York, referred to
as Swan. Were there others?
A There were a couple in Miami that I recall. Not in
Miami. I think there was one -- yes, there was one in Miami,
I think, and one down in Key West that they used.
Q Where was Radio Swan located?
A On Swan Island.
Q Where is Swan Island?
A Swan Island is a little glob around Honduras.
Q As far as you can recall, were there any other
radio stations in the United States that were utilized to
broadcast propaganda materials toward Cuba?
A Well, there conceivably could have been, not that
I recall right now.
Q Do you recall any attempts by the Agency or groups
affiliated with