178-10004-10056
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
8/27/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ROCKCOM
RECORD NUMBER:
178-10004-10056
RECORD SERIES :
ASSASSINATION FILES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: MISC. ROCKEFELLER COM. AND CIA FILES (9)
ORIGINATOR:
CIA
FROM:
TO:
DIRECTOR, CIA
TITLE:
[Restricted]
DATE:
11/14/1962
PAGES:
33
SUBJECTS:
Document Information
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS
CUBA
CIA
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
MEMORANDUM
Top Secret
IB; IC
Redact
08/04/1993
COMMENTS:
IMONGOOSC
PARAS S,
15-1
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
19
178-10004-10056
SCI
14 November 1962
PROFORET OF
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
:
CIA Handling of the Soviet Build-up
in Cuba, 1 July - 16 October 1962
CONTAINS
SENSITIVE COMPARTMENTED INFORMATION
A. The Background
1. The USSR's decision to develop Cuba as a military
base must have been made by the spring of 1962, and prepara-
tions within the USSR must have been under way from that
time on. There also must have been planning activities in
Cuba, particularly reconnaissance and survey work. The
only indication of these operations which has so far been
found is a single intercepted personal message on 11 April
to a Russian in Cuba who had previously been at the
Kapustin Yar missile test range. This fragment was not
judged solid or important enough to warrant inclusion by
itself in current intelligence publications.
2. Thus, until the first evidence of the deployment
began to come in late in July, Washington had no warning
of the USSR's intention. Intelligence officers dealing with
Cuba were focussing during July on the direction Soviet-
Cuban relations would take following Soviet acquiescence in
Castro's assertion of his leadership of Cuban Communism in
the "Escalante affair." This attitude was reflected in
reporting on the visit of Raul Castro to Moscow early in
the month. The President's Intelligence Checklist, which
will normally be used in this memorandum as the record of
CIA reporting to the President, Secretaries of State and
Defense, General Taylor, and McGeorge Bundy, reported on
4 July that Raul was "probably seeking more Soviet military
aid and, specifically, more advanced equipment such as the
MIG-21s and surface-to-air missiles which the USSR is
already providing to Indonesia, Egypt, and Iraq." The
Checklist of 19 July, however, noted that Raul had left
Moscow without the usual publicity and communiqué, and
surmised that this was "a pretty good sign that the visit
was unproductive." (The Central Intelligence Bulletin,
whenever coordination permitted, carried material generally.
similar to the content of the Checklist.)
SCI
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
1
PROPERTY
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST HE WHITE ...
3. The Intelligence Community view of the Cuban problem
in this period was crystallized in NIE 85-2-62, The Situation
and Prospects in Cuba, passed by USIB on 1 August 1962, as
the intelligence foundation.for MONGOOSE. This estimate
stated that:
a. "By force of circumstances, the USSR is
becoming ever more deeply committed to preserve
and strengthen the Castro regime. The USSR,
however, has avoided any formal commitment to
protect and defend the regime in all contingencies."
b. "We believe it unlikely that the Bloc will
provide Cuba with the capability to undertake major
independent military operations overseas. We also
believe it unlikely that the Bloc will station in
Cuba Bloc combat units of any description, at least
for the period of this estimate."
c. "The Soviets...would almost certainly
never intend to hazard their own safety for Cuba's
sake," but "have sought to create the impression
that Cuba was under the protection of their missile
power..."
d. "We believe that the Blcc will continue to
limit its military assistance to Cuba to defensive
weapons7. Such a policy would not preclude the
provision of more advanced jet fighters, surface-to-
air missiles, and modern radars, or even the pro-
vision of a token number of IL-28 jet light bombers...".
-2-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALI
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE
PROPERTY OF
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
B. The Soviet Operation Begins
4. During the last two weeks of July, Soviet ships
'carrying equipment and personnel for the build-up made
their first voyages to Cuban ports, the first arriving in
the period 26-29 July. Knowledge of some of these move-
ments reached CIA through routine intelligence coverage
of Soviet shipping before the ships reached Cuba.
No
particular significance is normally attached to such
voyages. However, evidence gradually accumulated that
the "behavior pattern" of these ships was similar to that
of Soviet ships carrying arms to other countries, that
even greater security measures than usual were in effect,
that a number of the ships were coming from Baltic rather
than Black Sea ports, that some of these were passenger
ships, and finally that there was a general movement of
Bloc shipping toward Cuba: on an unprecedented scale.
5. Apparently, the first recognition of unusual
activity in any intelligence publication was a note in a
daily review of economic intelligence for CIA internal
use. Commenting on an NSA report that certain Soviet
ships were en route to Cuba which had declared for other
destinations, this paper stated on 1 August that "at
lease some, if not all, of the ships involved probably
are carrying additional military equipment to Cuba."
This statement was in direct contradiction to NSA's com-
ment on the same information, ime., that it tended to
corroborate a report by the Brazilian Ambassador in Havana
(earlier intercepted by NSA) that Raul Castro had asked
the USSR to take back excess war materiel.
6. CIA was also in disagreement with DIA over inter-
pretation of intelligence on the movement of shipping to
Cuba throughout the month of August. The resulting dif-
ficulties in coordination of the Central Intelligence
Bulletin held up publication from 3 August to 9 August
of the first item on the Cuban build-up in that publica-
tion. As late as 29 August, DIA in its own daily
Intelligence Summary said that "The high volume of
shipping probably reflects planned increases in trade
between the USSR and Cuba..." There were further dif-
ficulties resulting from CIA-DIA differences in the
interpretation of photography of aircraft crates deck-
loaded on Soviet ships; the record shows that CIA was
-3-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST.
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
right. Finally, it should be noted that there is a
long history of CIA efforts to obtain better photo-
graphy on deck cargoes and faster service in returning
these pictures to Washington.
7. The Checklist reported the accumulating informa-
tion fully to the President. On 4 August, it stated
that "Eleven Soviet ships are on their way to Havana
and we strongly suspect they are carrying arms. Such
a delivery would not be far short of the total amount
of arms delivered in the first half of 1962."
On
Some
9 August, it said "Soviet shipments to Cuba have been
arriving on an unprecedented scale since mid-July.
32 vessels are involved, at least half of these we believe
to be carrying arms. Five passenger ships with a total
capacity of about 3,000 persons have already arrived.
Some of the personnel are said to be Soviet technicians,
and we have no reason to doubt this. We do not believe
there are any combat troops among them."
8. The DCI on 8 August briefed the Republican Policy
Committee, emphasizing the arrival of Soviet military
equipment and technicians. Two days later, at a MONGOOSE
meeting, he again stressed the importance of this intel-
ligence and raised questions as to what purpose was behind
the sudden movement of men and materiel. He said that
the United States must face the possibility of the USSR
locating MRBMS in Cuba as a step that it could justify
because of US missile bases in places like Italy and
Turkey.
9. Soviet operations in August involved primarily
the establishment of surface-to-air missile and coast
defense missile positions. By the middle of August
CIA was receiving a large volume of agent and refugee
reporting which, while understandably garbled and
fragmentary, enabled analysts to pinpoint areas of con-
struction and identify some of the equipment coming in.
On 18 August, the Checklist reported "There are grounds
for thinking that the large influx of Soviet military
equipment and technicians into Cuba lately could be
connected with the beginning of construction of surface-
to-air missile sites. What we know so far is that
the shipments have included quantities of electronic,
transportation and construction equipment, some of it
similar to Soviet equipment which showed up in Indonesia
for the building of SAM installations, and that many of the
arriving Soviets are construction personnel..." There were
further Checklist items along the same line on 23 and 28
August.
-4-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
C. The July Overflight Program
10. On 10 July, General Taylor, motivated primarily by
the extensive use of aerial reconnaissance in following Chi-
nese Communist military activities in Fukien, had asked the
DCI for a comprehensive review of aerial photography activi-
ties. The end-product of this exercise was a series of mem-
oranda dated approximately 16 July from the DD/I to the DCI.
The one on Cuba recommended that U-2 flights over Cuba be
continued at their current level of two a month. It cited
inter alia in justification that earlier missions over Cuba
had provided "conclusive evidence that recurring reports of
submarines and missile bases in Cuba have been false," and
that "our most important need is for any evidence of the de-
ployment of SA-2 missiles and/or MIG-21s in Cuba." This
proposal was approved by the Special Group on 19 July and
later by the President.
11. The first of the two Cuban U-2 missions authorized
for. August was flown on 5 August, probably just too soon to
detect significant reflections of the Soviet équipment enter-
ing the island at that time. The second mission was orig-
inally scheduled for 8 August but cancelled because of weather.
The next day the Special Group gave the DCI discretion to fly
the second August mission "whenever the immediate situation
with regard to Soviet materiel justified it." COMOR reaffirmed
its requirement for the second mission on 13 August. The mis-
sion was again scheduled for the period beginning on the 19th,.
held up for 9 days by weather and eventually flown on 29 August.
(See Para 19)
-5-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
D. Promulgation of NSAM 181 and the Response
12. On 21 August the DCI attended a meeting in Secretary
Rusk's office at which were also present Secretary McNamara,
Under Secretary Johnson, the Attorney General, Generals Taylor
and Lemnitzer, and McGeorge Bundy. He told this group that in-
formation available since 10 August indicated the extent of So-
viet aid was much greater than previously thought, and that
this probably included highly-sophisticated electronic installa-
tions or missile sites, probably ground-to-air. The DCI again
raised the possibility that the Soviets would locate MRBMS in
Cuba, and there developed a discussion of possible US courses
• of action in case they did so. It was agreed that the DCI would
fully brief the President the next day (which he did) and that
Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, Taylor, Bundy and the DCI would dis-
cuss the situation with the President on 23 August.
13. At the meeting of the 23rd, a number of actions were
decided upon to deal with what was agreed to be a critical
problem for the United States. These actions were formalized
in NSAM 181. (In addition, the President asked for a continu-
ing analysis of the number and types of Bloc personnel and
equipment in Cuba). Thus, by 23 August CIA had alerted the
highest levels of the government to a rapidly unfolding Soviet
military development in Cuba, including the probable establish-
ment of surface-to-air missile sites, and the danger of surface-
to-surface missiles. Furthermore the President had taken ac-
tion on the intelligence received. There was at this time no
evidence of any sort that surface-to-surface weapons were being
installed--in fact, the MRBM units had scarcely started en route
from the USSR--but the possibility had been discussed by the
President and his advisors.
14. The paragraphs of NSAM 181 applicable to CIA dealt
with: a) release of information, b) MONGOOSE, and c) "An anal-
ysis/which should be prepared of the probable military, po-
litical and psychological impact of the establishment in Cuba
of either surface-to-air missiles or surface-to-surface missiles
which could reach the US." The first two subjects are outside
the scope of this memorandum; the third exists as a memorandum
dated 31 August prepared largely by McGeorge Bundy and the DD/I.
This paper, which had the benefit of preliminary results of the
29 August U-2 mission, concluded that the introduction of sur-
face-to-air missiles was the "most probable present Soviet mis-
sile activity," and that such missiles would be a serious
threat to aerial reconnaissance, but not to "determined US at-
tack." It stated that "surface-to-surface missiles with nu-
clear warheads would constitute a very significant military
-6-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
threat to the continental US." The memorandum concluded that
introduction of any missiles "will have a substantial political
and psychological impact, while surface-to-surface missiles
would create a condition of great alarm."
15. In a memorandum of 27 August, General Carter reported
to Mr. Bundy what actions CIA was taking in response to NSAM.
181. He named the officers responsible for the three items
mentioned above and listed the following additional measures:
a. Task Force W was to look into the possibility of
removing restrictions on mounting clandestine operations out
of Guantanamo.
b. The Board of National Estimates was to establish
a procedure to ensure continuing analysis of the numbers and
types of Communist Bloc personnel entering Cuba, quantity and
types of Bloc equipment and its probable use, and all construc-
tion, particularly missile sites.
c. The Board was also to assess the physical and
psychological dangers to the US and Latin America of missile
installations in Cuba. (The two Board actions, which were
later synthesized in the paper which eventually appeared on
19 September as SNIE 85-3, had already been set in motion by
the DD/I, in a memo to the AD/NE of 24 August).
d. CIA was to begin immediately publishing a daily
paper on Cuba, including current intelligence, estimative as-
sessments and coverage of the press, to be distributed to the
President, Bundy, McNamara, Gilpatric, Lemnitzer, Rusk, Taylor,
and Robert Kennedy. (This paper, the Cuban Highlights memoran-
dum, was issued by CIA beginning 27 August, using a philosophy
and format similar to the Checklist. A few additional officials
were later added to its distribution. It was discontinued on:
19 September, because General Carter and the DD/I concluded
that sufficient emphasis was by then being given to Cuban re-
porting in regular intelligence publications).
e. CIA would arrange intelligence collection over-
flights "as frequently as the situation demands." (The results
of this action make up the central theme of this paper.)
f. Task Force W was to prepare a plan of operations
for MONGOOSE B Plus.
16. The minutes of USIB show that at its next meeting,
29 August, Mr. Hilsman requested an SNIE on the military build-
up in Cuba, to be submitted to USIB at its next regular meeting.
-7-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
Presumably Mr. Hilsman was also acting in response to NSAM 181.
In any case, the paper he requested and the Board memorandum
already requested by the DD/I were combined. Successive drafts
of such a paper, prepared by the ONE staff, were quickly over-
taken by the photography which became available after 29 August.
At the USIB meeting of 7 September, further attempts to write
it were deferred until the new information could be digested.
This estimate, SNIE 85-3-62, was in fact passed by USIB on 19
September. Its substance will be discussed later. (See Paras.
26-29) :
17. Also at the 29 August USIB. meeting, two other perti-
nent subjects were discussed. First, General Carter and Mr.
Cline raised the question of more rapid delivery from Turkey
and Denmark of Navy photography of outbound Soviet ships (see
para. 6). Second, General Carter informed the Board that he
had two days earlier asked General Lemnitzer about the possi-
bility of low-level photography using RF-101 or FSU aircraft
and that Lemnitzer had replied that something "could be dug up."
The conversation with Lemnitzer was the result of an instruction
telephoned from out of town by the DCI, who was concerned over
the long delay of the 29 August mission by weather. (The DCI
departed Washington on leave on 23 August, went first to the
West Coast, left the country on 30 August for the Riviera, and
returned to Washington on 23 September.) On 30 August Lemnitzer
told the Special Group of this discussion with General Carter.
The Group agreed to take cognizance of the matter and reopen it
"when specific targets and information needs could be identified."
-8-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
E. Hard Intelligence on the Build-Up (Defensive Phase)
18. During the last week in August, CIA continued to
follow the progress of the Soviet build-up, using shipping
information, communications intelligence, and agent and
refugee sources. The Checklist of 29 August reported that:
"There is no sign of a let-up in the movement
of Soviet equipment and personnel into Cuba.
"By latest count, there have during the
past six weeks been some 80 voyages to Cuban
ports by Bloc vessels and 20-35 by ships
under Communist charter.
"We note that deliveries of industrial
equipment, foodstuffs, and other nonmilitary
items are being made largely on chartered
Western ships, probably because so many
Soviet ships are involved in hauling military
gear."
19. The first hard evidence on what the Soviets were
up to in Cuba was provided by photography of the 29 August
mission. The President was told, in the Checklist of
31 August that:
"Preliminary information from the 30 / Sic7 August
U-2 mission shows at least seven SA-2 sites on the
western half of the island. Manning of this many
sites would require some 1500-2000. Bloc troops. We
are able to report on the basis of what is known so
far that construction of the sites appears to be
fairly advanced and that there are canvas-covered
missiles in the vicinity of some sites. The existence
of additional sites can probably be assumed.
"The same source reveals seven or eight Soviet
missile-equipped torpedo boats and an undetermined
number of Soviet tanks. The Cubans have had Soviet
tanks for some time, but this is our first indica-
tion that they now have boats of this type. They
appear to be KOMAR-class converted PT-boats, mounting
two surface-to-surface missiles with an estimated
range of 35 nautical miles."
After further analysis this information appeared in the
Central Intelligence Bulletin of 6 September. On the 4th
and 5th, General Carter briefed a number of congressional
leaders, including the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed
Services Committees. In a White House statement, also of
4 September, the President publicly confirmed the presence
of SA-2s and KOMAR-class boats.
-9-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
F. The New Overflight Program
24. The results of the 29 August and 5 September mis-
sions, in particular the confirmation of SA-2 sites, led to
a full review of the overflight program for Cuba. This took
place in the White House on 10 September. Among those pre-
sent were Mr. Rusk, Mr. Robert Kennedy, Mr. McGeorge Bundy,
General Carter, and General Lansdale. The decisions of this
meeting are crucial to the record, and some discussion of
the atmosphere in which they were taken is required.
There
were three major factors:
a. On 30 August, a SAC U-2 had overflown Sakhalin
Island. The USSR had protested on 4 September, the US had
acknowledged the overflight, and the incident has received
major play in the world press. This had been followed on 8
September by the loss of Mission GRC-127 over Communist
China, accompanied by even greater publicity. As a result,
most of the participants were--to varying degrees--reluctant
to chance another U-2 incident at this time. This meant:
that they were naturally hesitant to authorize any flights
over areas where SA-2s might be operational.
b. Second, there is no record that the MRBM
problem was discussed. The hard intelligence gathered
so far on the Soviet build-up (the Banes problem was
still up in the air), was not such as to produce a sense
of alarm or a feeling that urgent action was required.
The establishment of SA-2s and other advanced defensive
systems had been foreseen in the NIE of 1 August and
their probable arrival had been fully reported during the
intervening period. Hence confirmation came not as a shock,
but as a problem to be dealt with deliberately. (It may
even have served to relax the sense of urgency generated by
the President's decisions of 23 August, the known usually
being less alarming than the unknown.) The participants
therefore felt that the next step was to provide systematic
coverage of the rest of Cuba, from which the full story of
what the USSR had put into the island could be developed.
They felt no immediate need for re-coverage of the areas
covered by the two previous missions.
c. Finally, the participants were operating in
the atmosphere of the time. The Cubans had been claiming
that U.S. invasion was imminent. The Soviet diplomatic
and propaganda apparatus was attempting to focus attention
-12-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
on Berlin and hinting at a confrontation late in the year,
thus creating the impression that a Berlin crisis would not
come until after the US election. In fact, the USSR in its
statement of the following day (11 September) on Cuba stated
this explicitly. There were vague hints of Khrushchev's in-
tent to attend the UNGA in New York. Khrushchev appears now
to have been throwing up a diplomatic smoke-screen behind
which to carry out the deployment of strategic forces into
Cuba, but those present at the meeting of 10 September did
not have the benefit of this hindsight. Furthermore, they
must all have been acutely aware that Cuba was potentially
the campaign issue that could most seriously damage the Admin-
istration in the election campaign then beginning.
25. At the meeting, the Secretary of State objected to
the CIA proposal for two extended overflights covering the
remainder of the island not covered in the 29 August and 5
September missions. He insisted, instead, that coverage of
the rest of Cuba should be designed so that peripheral flights
over international waters would not be combined with over-
flights of Cuban territory. To meet his wishes, the program
was divided into four flights, two overflights and two peri-
pheral. One overflight was to be over the Isle of Pines and
the other over the part of Cuba east of 77° West to cover
Guantanamo and Banes. One peripheral flight was to cover
the north coast of eastern Cuba, the other the south coast.
The overflights would be quick "in-and-out" operations, while
all four were to be designed for maximum safety. (There
is apparently no written record that a decision was made not
to fly over known SA-2 sites, but in obtaining approval for
the tracks it was necessary to provide assurance that they
did not do so.) Later the DCI negotiated with the Depart-
ment of State permission to extend the Isle of Pines mis-
sion over the Bay of Pigs area of Cuba proper. The Presi-
dent approved this program, authorizing three flights in
September in addition to the one remaining of the normal
September allocation (Special Group action of 19 July).
Thus, the record shows that the President authorized every-
thing the Special Group requested.
-13-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
G. SNIE 85-3-62
26. The lack of urgency expressed in these decisions was
also reflected in the deliberations over and the content of
SNIE 85-3-62, The Military Build-up in Cuba, passed by USIB
on 19 September. This estimate, which was generated by the
issuance of NSAM 181, must be viewed as a symptom of the state
of mind in the Intelligence Community and in Washington gen-
erally during the first half of September. There were no dis-
sents and no major disagreements in preparation of the final
draft. Its key findings are as follows:
a. "We believe that the USSR values its position in
Cuba primarily for the political advantages to be derived from
it and consequently that the main purpose of the military build-
up in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there against
what the Cubans and the Soviets conceive to be a danger that
the US may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it.
The Soviets evidently hope to deter any such attempt by enhanc-
ing Castro's defensive capabilities and by threatening Soviet
military retaliation. At the same time, they evidently recog-
nize that the development of an offensive military base in
Cuba might provoke US military intervention and thus defeat
their present purpose."
b. "The Soviets themselves are probably still uncer-
tain about their future military program for Cuba. Indeed
they probably intend to test US and Latin American reactions
as they go along."
c. "As the build-up continues, the USSR may be tempted
to establish in Cuba other weapons represented to be defensive
in purpose but of a more 'offensive' character: e.g., light bomb-
ers, submarines, and additional types of short-range surface-to-
surface missiles...."
d. "However, they are well aware that the question of
offensive as opposed to defensive weapons in Cuba has become a
major political issue."
e. "The establishment on Cuban soil of Soviet nuclear
striking forces which would be used against the US would be in-
compatible with Soviet policy as we presently estimate it. It
would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level
of risk in US-Soviet relations than the USSR has displayed thus
far...However, Soviet military planners have almost certainly
considered the contribution which Cuban bases might make to the
-14-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
Soviet strategic posture and, in that connection, the feasibility
and utility of deploying nuclear delivery systems to Cuba. There-
fore, this contingency must be examined carefully, even though
it would run counter to current Soviet policy."
f. "Soviet planners might see some utility in deploy-
ing MRBMS and IRBMS to Cuba in order to supplement the limited
number of ICBMS now believed to be operational in the USSR and
to reach targets beyond the range of submarine-launched missiles."
g. "The establishment on Cuban soil of a significant
strike capability with such weapons would represent a sharp de-
parture from Soviet practice, since such weapons have so far
not been installed even in Satellite territory... The Soviets
might think that the political effect of defying the US by sta-
tioning Soviet nuclear striking power in so menacing a position
would be worth a good deal if they could get away with it.
ever, they would almost certainly estimate that this could not
be done without provoking a dangerous US reaction."
How-
h.. "Although the Soviets may see some military advan-
tages in Cuba as a strategic strike base, the risks would be
great and the political implications would run counter to the
kind of policy they are actually pursuing in Latin America.
They do not propose to win the region for communism by military
conquest. They count instead on a process of political action....
27. In commenting on these statements it must first be rec-
ognized that the judgment on the degree of risk which the USSR
was willing to accept was gravely in error. It should also be
recognized that the community was virtually unanimous in support
of this judgment; deployment of ballistic missiles and nuclear
weapons outside the USSR was without precedent. Further, while
the first ballistic missiles had probably arrived in Cuba in
the period 7-15 September, (see para. 37) the first reports from
ground observers who had seen them had not arrived in Washington
by 19 September; there was no evidence available that MRBMS
on the way. What the estimate failed to do, however, was to give
adequate weight to the pace at which Soviet operations were mov-
ing and to the great probability that the new installations were
manned by Soviet personnel. The community was still thinking in
terms of the rather deliberately-paced Soviet military aid pro-
grams for the UAR, Iraq, and Indonesia (and indeed for Cuba in
the 1960-62 period) when there was already good evidence that
the Cuban program had departed from this pattern.
28. Moreover, the Indonesian program too had broken the
pattern only a month before, when the USSR showed itself will-
ing to accept a substantially increased degree of risk for the
-15-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
sake of a political gain something less than vital to Soviet
interests. The original contracts for Indonesia had been
roughly similar to those for the UAR and Iraq. They included
14 SA-2 sites, 12 KOMARS, 26 TU-16s (12 equipped with air-to-
surface missiles) and 12 submarines, all to be manned by In-
donesians and to be delivered at a pace consonant with the re-
quired training of personnel. However, as the crisis over
West New Guinea approached its climax of. August, Soviet eager-
ness to embroil the Indonesians in open warfare with the Dutch
led them to accelerate delivery schedules and to permit the
use of Soviet personnel to operate some of the weapons being
provided. Six submarines manned by Soviet crews actually con-
ducted war patrols under nominal Indonesian command. Thus by
mid-August the USSR had shown itself willing to take some risk
of military engagement with an ally of the United States, al-
beit the degree of risk involved was far less than in the Cu-
ban venture.
29. For the record, there is no evidence that the ex-
istence of SNIE 85-3 had any inhibiting influence on later de-
cisions. It was not, for instance, cited to support an argu-
ment against continuing overflights. Nor did it affect current
intelligence reporting; this is conducted independently of the
estimative process and provides a check on the continuing val-
idity of standing estimates.
-16-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
H. Views of the DCI
30. The only available record of dissent from the
judgments made in Washington during the first half of
September, both estimative and operational, is that of the
DCI himself, who, although vacationing on the Riviera, was
kept informed by CIA cable. On 7 September, he cabled
General Carter urging frequent repeat reconnaissance missions
and stating that "my hunch is we might face prospect of Soviet
short-range surface-to-surface missiles of portable types in
Cuba which could command important targets in Southeast US
and possibly Caribbean areas." On 10 September, the DCI
again cabled "Difficult for me to rationalize extensive
costly defenses being established in Cuba...appears to me
quite possible measures now being taken are for purpose of
ensuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMS
to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed and
country secured from overflights. Suggest Board of National
Estimates study motives...." (The Board's response is in
effect contained in SNIE 85-3.)
31. On 13 September and again on 16 September the DCI
repeated these premonitions. In the latter cable he added
"Do not wish to be overly alarming this matter but believe
CIA and community must keep Government informed of danger
of a surprise and also that detection of preparatory steps
possibly beyond our capability once Cuba defense system
operative." Finally, on 20 September, the DCI expressed
reservations on the conclusions of SNIE 85-3, which had
been cabled to him, saying "as an alternative I can see that
an offensive Soviet base in Cuba will provide Soviets with
most important and effective trading position in connection
with all other critical areas and hence they might take
unexpected risks in order to establish such a position."
These views were provided to the DD/I and the Board of
National Estimates.
32. As a result of the DCI's pressure there was a
renewed examination of other methods of reconnaissance of
Cuba. (It should be noted here that this discussion was
in terms of what might be necessary after the establishment
of a complete SA-2 defense had made use of the U-2 impossible,
with the implicit thought that only at this point would the
Soviets risk the introduction of such weapons as MRBMS.)
On 19 September, at USIB, General Carter stated his desire
to use RF-101s over Cuba. He also said he thought use of
the FIREFLY drone over Cuba could be justified to the
-17-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
Group, adding that "we cannot put a stop to collection in
Cuba; otherwise the President would never know when the
point of decision was reached." The Special Group at its
next meeting approved consideration of the use of FIREFLY
and COMOR forwarded to USIB on 27 September a program for
its use. (NO FIREFLY missions have yet been attempted.)
33. Another attempt during this period to get addi-
tional coverage was the programming of KEYHOLE Mission
9045 (29 September - 2 October) to photograph Cuba. The
results were unsatisfactory, largely because of cloud cover.
-18-
TOP SECRET DINAR CHESS RUFF IDEALIST
I. CIA Reporting during September
34. The progressive uncovering of the Soviet program in
Cuba was reported in detail by CIA current intelligence.
Pertinent samples from the Checklist are:
a. "The number of confirmed SAM sites remains at
12, but the likelihood that others are under con-
struction grows, with the latest evidence pointing to
the Isle of Pines as one of the additional locations."
(14 September)
b. "A message intercepted yesterday on a net
serving Soviet forces in Germany called for 'volunteers
for the protection of Cuba.' We are not sure of the
weight to be placed on this and another intercept
referring to the isolation of 'volunteers.' If valid,
they would suggest that the influx of Soviet military
personnel to Cuba is not finished. We are investigating
further." (15 September)
c. "We have spotted two more Soviet passenger
vessels en route to Cuba. Their arrival will raise
our estimate of technicians on the scene to about
4,200. We are beginning to see some tenuous evidence
foreshadowing the appearance of SAM sites in Camaguey
Province." (18 September)
d.