178-10004-10115
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
8/27/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: CHENEY
RECORD NUMBER:
178-10004-10115
RECORD SERIES:
GENERAL SUBJECT FILE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
INTELLIGENCE--REPORT BY JAMES J. ANGLETON
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
CIA
FROM:
ANGLETON, JAMES
TO:
ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION
TITLE:
REPORT TO PRES. COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE U.S.
DATE:
00/00/1975
PAGES:
37
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
ANGLETON, JAMES
CONSPIRACY THEORIES, USSR
NOSENKO, YURI
OSWALD, LEE, RUSSIAN PERIOD
ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION
REPORT
Secret
1B; 4
Redact
08/09/1993
See pages 5-7. Does not include attachments.
v9.1
33
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 1
178-10004-10115
SECRET SENSITIVE
REPORT TO THE PRESIDENTIAL COMMISSION ON
CIA ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE UNITED STATES
Mr. Vice President and Members of the Commission:
In accordance with the Commission's request, my
former colleagues and myself submit herewith a critique
of the counterintelligence function in the Agency. We
welcome the Commission's interest in this matter because
it will be the first review of U.S. counterintelligence
at such a responsible level in Government. In any
event, it is urged that authoritative attention, beyond
the life of the Commission, be given to the scope and
role of counterintelligence in the Intelligence Community.
This action is imperative because the current leadership is
almost totally uninformed and inexperienced in the specialty
of counterintelligence, and its authority for changes is being
permitted to go unchallenged. The result is reflected in the
failure to maintain continuity in this function.
We believe
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
i
CLASSIFIED BY 054519
EXEMPT FROM GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION
SCHEDULE OFE 0 11952, EXEMPTION CATEGORY:
ยง 55(1), (2) (3) or (4) fcircle one or more)
AUTOMATICALLY DECLASIFIED ON
Date Impossible to Determine
(unless impossible, insert date or event)
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 2
SECRET SENSITIVE
that unless there are some enforceable guidelines set forth
by a higher authority, the conduct of effective counterin-
telligence by the Government will be lost for years to come.
Counterintelligence is traditionally a vital plate in
the shield of national security. It also protects the
security and well-being of our Allies who have access to our
sensitive intelligence by virtue of identity of interests or
because of formal arrangements and pacts such as NATO. There
are also useful confidential interservice agreements whereby
certain foreign intelligence services conduct unilateral or
joint operations with our field stations, and the standard
of their security is of continuing concern. In lower key,
it is also in the interest of CIA to aid the security serv-
ices of the remaining non-Communist countries where any
friendly elements exist.
Although we have been charged primarily with our view
on CIA counterintelligence as such, we have included, as
perspective requires, the security and counterintelligence
interrelationship of other agencies and departments. Unlike
the collection and evaluation of positive intelligence,
there has not been organized in Government, and particularly
in the Intelligence Community, any machinery to produce an
end-product which might be described to be national as dis-
tinguished from departmental counterintelligence.
Very
little is logical regarding this subject, unless one views the
historical framework of the function, in terms of the special,
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 3
2
SECRET SENSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
if not privileged, position of the FBI who had dominated the
Intelligence Community as it relates to counterintelligence.
Director Hoover refused to submit his views or policies to
the scrutiny of the Intelligence Community where any problem
remotely impinged on the interests and/or jurisdiction of
the FBI. This unassailable stance estopped any and all at-
tempts to bring the Bureau to account in any interagency
board of equals charged with counterintelligence oversight,
including the very effective President's Foreign Intelligence
Board (PFIAB) who were thoroughly apprised of the facts,
given their continuity and authority within the Community.
What emerged was a loose ad hoc liaison of third parties,
but never a meeting of chiefs with Mr. Hoover to hammer out
basic issues relating to internal security and counterintelli-
gence. This was the state of affairs until the appointment
of Mr. Gray; counterintelligence as a function of Government
with few exceptions was frozen by Mr. Hoover. Mr. Gray's
tenure was marred by the turbulence of Watergate, and it was
only with the appointment of Mr. Kelley that a new era opened
Unfortunately, nothing of consequence has been tabled
with Mr. Kelley on the outstanding issues.
up.
Unlike the producers of positive intelligence, those
engaged in counterintelligence are the primary consumers of
their own product, and the counterintelligence product is less
perishable than that of positive intelligence. We have at-
tempted to remedy this omission over the years on an ad hoc
basis by distilling intelligence from counterintelligence operations,
SECRET SENSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 4
SECRET SENSITIVE
and we have concluded that ad hoc arrangements are inadequate
for satisfying those who have a need for the counterintelli-
gence end-product. As to the recipients, they should include
selected officials who are involved in the estimating process
This has
not been the case in the past, and as a result of this void,
as well as policy makers up to the Cabinet level.
there has existed a conflict of views at both the policy and
estimating levels regarding intentions, capabilities and the
peculiar political dynamics of the Soviet Bloc.
Experience
would indicate that the basis differences in interpretation
and evaluation are seemingly unbridgeable. What is required
as soon as possible is an authoritative forum with access to
all-source information in which differences may be joined and
adjudicated.
We believe that the result would give the guidelines
and targets for political action follow-up and would have a
significant impact on interdepartmental policies which are
not unrelated to the Soviet Bloc realities which we have un-
covered in counterintelligence.
Specifically, reference is made to cases which involve
a determination regarding the bona fides of Soviet defectors
and Bloc sources whose positive information is given, the
broadest dissemination even though the source is suspect.
From the beginning it has been defectors who have given us
the most vivid appreciation of the clandestine activities of
the Soviet Bloc. It is through defectors that one gains
SECRET SENSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 5
SECRET SENSITIVE
knowledge regarding the identities and use of penetration
agents and agents of influence who are, in turn, the kingpins
of Soviet strategic deception.
An example of recent vintage which illustrates the
range of confusion is Mr. McCone's response on television to
a question that certain information was not turned over to
the Warren Commission because the source was the KGB defector,
Nosenko, whose bona fides at the time were not fully estab-
lished. After having asserted that much effort always is devoted
to the problems of bona fides, Mr. McCone related that he had
been informed that the Agency's position now regarding Nosenko,
as a result of a painstaking examination, was that he is
bonafide. Astounded by this statement, the undersigned called
the Agency officer who was the former executive assistant to
Mr. McCone for clarification.
He opined that Mr. McCone
could not remember everything but that he would look into the
matter. As of this writing there has been complete silence
as to the identity of the Agency's spokesman.
To understand the significance of this anonymous bestowal
of bona fides requires some further explanation of the Nosenko
case. Several thousand man-hours have been expended in inter-
viewing Nosenko and analyzing his information. While there
were those somewhat removed from the case who accepted his
bona fides, a contrary view was registered by the following:
the Chief of the Soviet Division (who is now the Director's
National Intelligence Officer for Soviet Production); the then
5
SECRET SENSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 6
SECRET SENSITIVE
Deputy Chief of the Soviet Division, even though he was the
first contact of Nosenko's in the field; and his chief as-
sociates in the Division. In favor of Nosenko's bona fides
have been the Office of Security and certain other members
of the Soviet Division. The most persuasive detractor of
Nosenko has been the KGB defector, Golitsyn. He is regarded
to be the most knowledgeable KGB defector to come our way.
After a lengthy analysis, he concluded that Nosenko was a
dispatched agent provocateur.
His views are also shared
independently by another Soviet Intelligence Officer who
defected to the Agency. The Counterintelligence Staff ar-
rived at the same conclusion.
The question of bona fides
is unresolved.
It has been permitted to fester without any
authoritative conclusion because it is an interagency prob-
lem affecting other Soviet Bloc cases which are controlled
elsewhere in the Community.
Nosenko's information revolves
J
around the following subject matters:
1. President Kennedy's Assassination:
Nosenko's story is that while he was in the
KGB's internal intelligence, he read the case
file on Oswald. Given the timing of his de-
fection, shortly after the assassination, his
account not borne out by the initial poly-
graph may be viewed as exonerating the
Soviets of any complicity with Oswald, thus
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 7
6
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
supporting the flimsy documentation on
Oswald handed over to the U.S. Government
by the USSR. This would also tend to disa-
vow any relationship between the USSR and
Cuba in clandestine activity.
2.
Penetrations: With one or more
exceptions, he stated that there were no
penetrations of the U.S. Government.
This
assertion flew in the face of the overview
which Golitsyn gave to us regarding Soviet
Bloc penetration of Western services and
strategic deception.
3. Order of Battle of the KGB at Home
and Abroad:
There are many instances where
Nosenko's information contradicts Golitsyn's.
industrial com-
We have concluded on the basis of present evidence that
Nosenko was dispatched to the West to mutilate the counter-
intelligence leads which had been revealed by Golitsyn.
As to his observations regarding Oswald, it was the Soviets
who have pushed the deception theme to the effect that
Oswald was an instrument of the military
plex of the eastern United States.
raised by Khrushchev in Cairo in an
he had with an American journalist.
sued by the Soviets through various channels, mainly KGB,
and it is now common currency in Soviet newspapers and other
media.
This thought was first
unusual interview which
It has since been pur-
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 8
SECRET SENSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
The Nosenko case goes to the quick of the
counterintelligence problem facing not only the FBI and the
Agency but all Western Intelligence and Security Services,
many of whom have received information derived from Nosenko.
It is evident that as presently organized, the
Intelligence Community is incapable of correlating intelli-
gence production with the product and analysis of counter-
intelligence information.
Given the inability of the Intelligence Community to come
to grips with the problems raised by counterintelligence, it
is suggested that the only solution to the very unsatisfactory
situation today would be the appointment of an ombundsman who
would be authorized to act directly on behalf of the
National Security Council on serious interagency problems which
have a direct bearing on the plans and capabilities of the
Communist Bloc and involve the more sensitive operations of
counterintelligence. Alternatively, consideration could be
given to the responsibilities of the Chairman of PFIAB, which
might be enlarged to satisfy this need.
As Attachment A, I submit a letter and attachment which
was submitted to the Secretary of Defense on 31 January 1975.
Given the march of events and the uncertainties involved, in
addition to the responsibilities of his high office, it is
understandable, perhaps, that the Secretary has not wished
to become entangled in disputations on this subject matter
as long as the Agency and its various Directors are being
subjected to investigation. Nevertheless, in our view, the
SECRET SCENITIVE
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 9
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
issues involving Soviet strategic disinformation and our
defense posture go to the heart of national security inso-
far as they relate to estimates affecting the world balance
of power.
Additionally, we believe it to be most misleading
for one to assume that estimates derived from technical col-
lection alone justify the negotiation of finite disarmament
and other treaties with the Soviet Bloc governments unless
there is corresponding high-level covert intelligence pro-
duction which supplements and confirms the findings of
technical collection.
This view argues against the philosophy now being aired
with Olympian aplomb that technical coverage alone is a
substitute for clandestine sources or that it gives a reliable
data base which justifies a super power to bargain away its
strength. (Attachment B sets forth the views of
Mr. Paul Nitze and his first-hand impression of the SALT
talks. Of particular interest is his description of the
atmospherics: [a] the peculiar role of the KGB among Soviet
negotiators, and [b] how an uninformed U.S. representation
learned from the Soviet delegation of changes in the U.S.
negotiating positions arrived at in Washington. The KGB
attempted similar ploys during the Johnson Administration
with a former high official of President Kennedy's on the
Vietnam issue.)
If there be validity to the information derived from
Golitsyn, then it would follow that detente and estimates
SECRETOSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 10
SECRET SENSITIVE
derived therefrom are misleading with regard to the events
in Portugal, Vietnam and other areas where we are in com-
petition with the Soviets and the Bloc. A more accurate
picture could be obtained if the structure of the
Intelligence Community, in its processing of information,
were less concerned with public or overt data regarding
the Soviet Bloc intentions, such as the reporting of
Ambassadors and other representatives, and instead give
full faith and credit to secret information from bona fide
sources who are or were within the Soviet Bloc system and
whose warnings regarding disinformation have been uni-
versally ignored. To repeat, it is the opinion of these
sources that the bulk of information available to the
West through Soviet Bloc contacts, regarding the strategy
and aims of the Eastern Bloc, is, on the whole, spurious
and represents little more than coordinated handouts which
advance the interests of Soviet Bloc strategic disinformation
at many levels of communications.
The remainder of this report represents the status, as
of March 1975, of U.S. counterintelligence, primarily within
the CIA, but also, as the perspective requires, at the na-
tional level. The discussion consists of four parts;
The authority under which CIA conducts
counterintelligence activities.
The nature of those activities.
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 11
10
SECRET SENSITI
Photocopy
Gerald R. Ford Library
from
SECRET SENSITIVE
A summary of critical developments in
the history of U.S. counterintelligence from
1945 to 1975.
Recommendations which we respectfully
urge the Commission to submit to the President
for his consideration.
I.
THE AUTHORITY
The current version of National Security Council
Intelligence Directive No. 5, U.S. Espionage and Counter-
intelligence Activities Abroad, effective 17 February 1972,
is the charter for the conduct of foreign clandestine ac-
tivities by CIA and by the other members of the U.S. in-
telligence and counterintelligence community. NSCID/5
defines counterintelligence as
that intelligence
activity, with its resultant product, devoted to destroying.
the effectiveness of inimical foreign intelligence activities
and undertaken to protect the security of the nation and its
personnel, information and installations against espionage,
sabotage and subversion. Counterintelligence includes the
process of procuring, developing, recording and disseminating
information concerning hostile clandestine activity and of
penetrating, manipulating or repressing individuals groups
or organizations conducting such activity."
As defined, counterintelligence consists of two parts,
security and counterespionage. Security is essentially the
Photocopy
Gerald R. Ford Library
from
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 12
SECRET SENSITIVE
static defenses erected against the clandestine activities
of adversaries of the U.S., whereas counterespionage is
aggressive activity of engaging the adversary clandestinely.
NSCID/5 stipulates that the Director of Central
Intelligence shall undertake specified actions in order to
ensure centralized direction of all clandestine activities
within the scope of the Directive.
It also charges CIA
with primary responsibility for U.S. clandestine activities
abroad and permits other departments and agencies to conduct
such foreign clandestine activities as are supplementary or
are necessary to their security. Departmental counterin-
telligence is brought together through two Director of
Central Intelligence Directives, one which requires coordi-
nation in advance with CIA on clandestine counterintelligence
operations abroad, and the other which stipulates that CIA
shall serve as a central repository of foreign counterin-
telligence data to the Intelligence Community.
The flow of authority is from the National Security
Council to the Director of Central Intelligence to the
Deputy Director for Operations to the central counterintelli-
gence unit of CIA or to an area division to provide whatever
assistance the Director may require to discharge his obliga-
tions under NSCID/5 and its assignment to him of responsi-
bility for the protection of methods and sources or under
other laws, orders and directives. The immediate mandate
of the counterintelligence component, however, is derived from
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 13
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
those responsibilities assigned directly to CIA (and thus
chiefly from paragraphs lb, 3b, 3c, 3d and 9 of NSCID/5, the
chief provisos of which have been noted above).
In our view the DCI is not exercising under NSCID/5
responsible centralized direction of counterintelligence
clandestine activity. As indicated to the Commission in
verbal testimony, the current Director has spent less than
four to five hours with the Counterintelligence Staff from
the moment he became the Deputy Director for Operations
until the present. His knowledge of the activity during the
period when he was Chief of the Far East Division was one of
failure and is reflected in an Inspector General's report of
the period. This and some of his communications to the field
are a matter of record in the FE Division. Instead of exer-
cising leadership in resolving the serious problems of pene-
tration and disinformation, which are of prime importance to
the security of the country, under his aegis there has been a
decentralization and mutilation within the Agency and, there-
fore, within the Community of high-level counterintelligence
activity. We believe that substantial changes are needed
and that these changes should be effected with and through
an understanding of our counterintelligence mission, capa-
bilities and needs. In setting forth our collective views on
these matters, we do so, drawing on our professional experi-
ence as to what needs to be set right and how it may be done.
The primary cause of the present vulnerability of our na-
tional security is the inadequate attention and serious lack
of understanding of the counterintelligence function.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 14
SECRET SENSITIVE
II.
THE NATURE OF COUNTERINTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
The counterintelligence unit of the CIA bears a direct
responsibility for the security of all Agency espionage and
counterintelligence operations conducted abroad. It is also
directly responsible for identifying and containing or con-
trolling hostile clandestine activity through such operations
as the following:
The identification of adversary
personnel, regardless of citizenship or
location abroad.
The penetration of foreign services.
The handling and utilization of
certain intelligence and counterintelligence
defectors from foreign services.
tions.
The management of double agent opera-
The detection, analysis and nullifi-
cation of hostile deception operations,
including disinformation.
Counterintelligence analysis and
operations directed against adversary
propaganda, defamation, forgeries and other
covert activities.
The exploitation of communications
intelligence in furtherance of counterin-
telligence objectives..
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 15
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
The conduct of liaison abroad with
foreign counterintelligence and security
services and with foreign services
generally about counterintelligence matters.
The conduct of domestic counterintel-
ligence liaison to ensure the necessary
sharing of information and coordination of
action..
The maintenance of its own records and
the managerial supervision of CIA's central
repository of records to ensure that the
foreign counterintelligence in these holdings
is collated, analyzed and made available to
others in the Intelligence Community on a
need-to-know basis.
III.
A SUMMARY OF THE COUNTERINTELLIGENCE HISTORY OF CIA
After the Second World War, except for a few stations
abroad, centralized U.S. counterintelligence practically
disappeared. By October 1945, when O.S.S. was liquidated,
its counterintelligence branch, X-2, had become a wide-
spread net of overseas stations staffed by some 650 counter-
intelligence specialists. Starting nearly from scratch,
X-2 had created and developed a thoroughly professional
U.S. counterintelligence capability in a very short time
because it served a leadership that understood and respected
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 16
3.
15
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
the counterintelligence function and conferred upon it the
necessary measure of authority, autonomy and the essential
secrecy required for the conduct of this activity. To better
understand the need for reform, it is believed that a short
historical presentation is essential.
What is here submitted
is based on voluminous files and documentation which record
the shaky progress of counterintelligence as practiced by
the U.S. Government following World War II until the present.
After October. 1945 the concept of counterintelligence as
a separate and equal function withered away. On 17 October
of that year Brigadier General John A. Magruder, then the
director of the Strategic Services Unit (a short-lived
inheritor of O.S.S.), stated in a memorandum to
Mr. John J. McCloy that the valuable O.S.S. liaison relation-
ships abroad were deteriorating because foreign services were
uncertain as to whether the United States would have a central
intelligence service.
General Magruder was an honorable and
conscientious custodian of O.S.S.
Although CIA was established in 1947, and although the
first version of NSCID/5, promulgated in December 1947,
charged the Director of Central Intelligence with the conduct
of all organized federal counterespionage operations overseas,
the new Agency did not have a central counterintelligence
unit of mechanism through which it could meet its counter-
intelligence responsibilities.
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 17
SEORETO CONSITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
On 1 January 1949 a report was submitted to the
National Security Council at its request by men whom it had
appointed to a Survey Group: Messrs. Allen W. Dulles
(chairman) William H. Jackson and Mathias F. Correa. As
one who had played a key role in the Office of Strategic
Services, Mr. Dulles was familiar with the wartime role and
performance of X-2. He understood its record and mission
which were succinctly stated in the War Report: Office
of Strategic Services.1 The opening paragraph of this of-
ficial account of X-2 reads as follows: "Counterespionage
is a distinct and independent intelligence function.
embraces not only the protection of the intelligence in-
terests of the government it serves, but, by control and
manipulation of the intelligence operations of other
nations, it performs a dynamic function in discerning
their plans and intentions, as well as in deceiving them.
An effective counterespionage organization is therefore an
intelligence instrument of vital importance to national
security."2
It
The Dulles Committee made recommendations designed to
strengthen CIA and its counterintelligence capability. The
1
2
Vol. I, Washington Organization, History Project, Strategic
Services Unit, Office of the Assistant Secretary of War,
War Department, Washington, D. C., July 1949.
Ibid., p. 189.
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 18
17
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
1949 report is infused with an understanding of problems and
principles that have remained much the same for the past
quarter of a century.
illustrative:
...
84
We
The following two brief quotations are
...
propose that the branches of
the Central Intelligence Agency which are directly engaged
in clandestine actitivities, such as secret intelligence
[espionage), counterintelligence, secret operations and the
like, be given a great measure of autonomy as to internal
administration, the control of their operations and the
selection of personnel." The report also stated, "It
seems apparent that the present counterespionage staff of
the Office of Special Operations should be materially
strengthened and more intensive counterespionage work
promoted."
:
Until the end of 1954, however, counterintelligence
remained structurally and in other respects subordinate to
the collection of positive intelligence. In August 1950 there
was a counterintelligence sub-unit called Staff C, but it had
a total strength of twenty-three. The Soviet Intelligence
Branch of Staff C consisted of three people. The result was
a dispersion of the counterintelligence function among the
area branches and a degradation of the work to such lowest
common. denominators as name tracing, maintenance of
counterintelligence files and the like.
A notice of 20 December 1954 announced the formation of
a new, senior counterintelligence element, the Counterintel-
ligence Staff. For the first time CIA had elevated the
SECRET SINCITIVE
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Fond Lixary
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 19
SECRET SENSITIVE
counterintelligence function, as a Staff function, to full
parity with espionage and covert activities. One of the
first undertakings of the Counterintelligence Staff was
to determine who was doing counterintelligence work, what
This survey
was launched in 1955 and completed in 1956. It established
they were doing and under what circumstances.
that except for the Counterintelligence Staff itself, the
Operational Directorate had only 133 full-time counterin-
telligence officers, about 6 per cent of its total non-
The average grade of these officers was
GS-09, and their average Agency experience was five years.
Only one in four had had either basic or advanced training
in counterintelligence.
clerical strength.
From the end of 1954 until April 1973, the apex of its
development, the Counterintelligence Staff grew in numbers,
skills and responsibilities. By the latter date its per-
sonnel strength, as I noted in my earlier report to the
Commission, consisted of 130 officers and seventy-two assist-
ants and clerical personnel. This total of 202 still con-
stituted only 3.7 per cent of the total Directorate of
Operations strength of 5,662. As a result CIA could not
meet its counterintelligence responsibilities adequately
even at this peak of on-board counterintelligence strength.
It is our view that the Operations Directorate ought to
devote no less than 10 per cent of its manpower to
counterintelligence and that no less than half of its
19
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 20
Photocoly
from
Gerald R. FordLibrary
SECRET SENSITIVE
counterintelligence personnel should be allocated to the
counterintelligence unit in Headquarters. This 10 per cent,
comprising 566 officer and clerical employees, would still
fall considerably short of our counterintelligence strength
in the fall of 1945 when 0.S.S. was dissolved.
The Counterintelligence Staff was nevertheless able
to work effectively against its major targets. The scope
of this paper prohibits an adequate resume, but there is an
indication of the results achieved in the fact that during
the years 1961 through 1963 eight major Soviet penetrations
of American and foreign liaison intelligence services were
uncovered and that six of the eight exposures resulted
directly from CIA's counterintelligence work. Fifteen Soviet
agents were arrested, as well as more than twenty others
who were working clandestinely for one or another of the
East European services.
In August 1973 as a result of the change in leadership
in the Agency, there was put in motion a series of baffling
administrative and functional changes which ignored the
state of the art; the need for resolving many inter-Agency
problems in counterintelligence, and, particularly, the
need to work out with the FBI in depth a number of conflicts
concerning the bona fides of sources; the handling of defec-
tors; and authoritative research and analysis pertinent to
these differences.
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 21
20
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
The strength of CIA's counterintelligence unit was
cut almost in half to eighty-nine; and by December 1974
the on-board strength of our counterintelligence personnel,
officer and clerical, was down to seventy-seven, a total
comprising 1.7 per cent of Operations Directorate strength.
This abrupt reduction in force was accompanied by the
transfer of four interlocking staff elements (International
Communism, Operational Approvals, Police and Counterintelli-
gence Liaison) to other jurisdictions. I do not know of
any reasons concerning the performance of the Counterintelli-
gence Staff or the scope of hostile clandestine intelligence
action against the U.S. which would justify this drastic
reduction and weakening.
With regard to the FBI it is a fact that for some years
prior to the death of Mr. Hoover, there were sharp differ-
ences between the FBI and the Counterintelligence Staff
regarding the bona fides of Soviet intelligence personnel
who represented perhaps the prime sources of information in
relation to Soviet Bloc activity in the U.S., penetration in
the Government and the order of battle of the Soviet presence.
CIA was fortunate to acquire a KGB defector in
December 1961 who had spent many years at a very high level
of Soviet security acquiring the most sensitive information
in the full knowledge that when the time was propitious, he
would defect to the West and impart his information. By way
of simplification, it should be noted that this individual
21
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 22
C
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
was responsible for the breaking of many espionage cases in
the West, but equally important he divulged Soviet plans,
strategy and organization effected in 1959 by the KGB under
the auspices of the Central Committee which in turn mapped
out in partnership with other services of the Bloc a pro-
gram of action whose principal targets were the isolation
of the U.S. as the "Main Enemy" and the ultimate change in
the balance of military power in favor of the Soviet Bloc.
During the later tenure of Mr. Hoover, which was
fraught with difficulties between the FBI and members of
the Senate, and included other changes hampering or limit-
ing the FBI's ability to conduct internal security opera-
tions, the hard issues of disagreement were never dealt
with on an agency-to-agency basis. To the contrary, as
the Commission is well aware, there was eventually a break-
down in liaison across the board between departments and
agencies of the Government with the FBI (with the exception
of the White House). Further, the internal disputes within
the Bureau challenging Mr. Hoover's leadership were extremely
detrimental to any objective consideration concerning the
national security, and consequently years were lost in
pursuing the national counterintelligence objective.
During this period, in our view, national estimates and
evaluations were formulated in concrete establishment of
detentist philosophy which marked the real state of
Soviet Bloc subversion in the secret war.
NW 50955 DocId: 32112721 Page 23
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
By way of explanation, we can illustrate the ineffectual
coordination with a case involving a long-term Soviet pene-
tration in the Agency. A very important staff agent was
unmasked by virtue of information supplied by the aforemen-
tioned defector, but in the process the FBI officially took
the position that the candidate who was submitted by the
Agency was not the Soviet agent in question, and by memo-
randum they proposed that we submit all of the data to the
Department of Defense on grounds that the penetration agent
was more likely a past or present asset of the military.
Subsequently, a high-level source confirmed our original
identification, which in turn was accepted by the FBI. The
case is illustrative of the inability within this Government
to resolve interagency differences in all of those sensitive
fields affecting penetration.
The result of the 1973 changes was a decentralization
of counterintelligence, a retrogression to the inadequacies
of the period 1949 to 1955. Now, as then, counterintelligence
in CIA lacks the necessary specialists and the requisite
interaction at the Agency's highest levels. Some of the
present grave problems are not new, but the recent changes
have greatly magnified them. Among our present weaknesses
are the following:
An almost total failure against
Soviet illegals (intelligence officers
under deep, non-official cover). At
23
NW 50955 DocId:32112721 Page 24
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
SECRET SENSITIVE
present CIA is not conducting a single
operation against a Soviet illegal.
An incapacity to pursue unresolved
outstanding leads. We estimate that there
are some fifteen hard-core leads to known
or probable penetrations by adversary
services into U.S. or Allied services;
that there are about one hundred leads
meriting immediate study, analysis, in-
vestigation and exploitation; and that
there are no less than one thousand that