180-10131-10329
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 10/19/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER: 180-10131-10329
RECORD SERIES : SECURITY CLASSIFIED TESTIMONY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 014727
ORIGINATOR: HSCA
FROM: SHAW, ROBERT T.
TO :
TITLE:
DATE: 05/16/1978
PAGES: 78
SUBJECTS: CIA, FILES
CIA, METHODOLOGY
SHAW, ROBERT T., TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
OSWALD, LEE, POST RUSSIAN PERIOD, TRAVEL, TRIPT TO
MEXICO
DURAN, SYLVIA
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: Secret
RESTRICTIONS: IB
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 02/01/2003
OPENING CRITERIA : Box 5
COMMENTS:
Document Information
PASCIONE: amt
SECRET
EXECUTIVE SESSION
TUESDAY, MAY 16, 1978:
U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Assassina-
tion of John F. Kennedy of
the Select Committee on
Assassinations,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 4:40 p.m.
in room 3370, House Annex No. 2, 2nd and D Streets, S.W.
Present: Michael Goldsmith and Dan Hardway.
Mr. Goldsmith. Miss Reporter, would you please swear
in the witness?
The Reporter. Do you solemnly swear that the testimony
which you are about to give will be the truth, the whole
truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Shaw. I do.
TESTIMONY OF ROBERT T. SHAW
Mr. Goldsmith. Would you state your name and address
for the record?
Mr. Shaw. Robert T. Shaw, 3715 Acosta Road, Fairfax,
Virginia, 22031.
Mr. Goldsmith. What is your present occupation, Mr.
Shaw?
Mr. Shaw. I am undercover with the Department of State,
but my actual occupation is Inspector, Office of the Inspector
General, Central Intelligence Agency.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Shaw, I handed you earlier a copy
of a letter from the Acting Director of the Central Intelli-
gence, Mr. Carlucci, to the Chairman of this Committee. It
corresponds to JFK Exhibit No. 94 in the Committee's hearing
record.
Have you had a chance to read that letter?
Mr. Shaw.. I read it just now.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you understand it?
Mr. Shaw. I understand it.
Mr. Goldsmith. I also would like to hand you the
Committee's rules and resolutions and ask you at this time
to read Rule No. 4 to yourself.
(Pause)
Mr. Shaw. I read it over.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you understand that?
Mr. Shaw. I understand it.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you understand that you have a right
to counsel?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you waive that right to counsel?
Mr. Shaw. I do not need counsel.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you understand that, under the
Committee rules, that you have a right to receive a copy of
the statement you are going to give us at this deposition?
Mr. Shaw. I should hope so, to check it for accuracy.
Mr. Goldsmith. However, by virtue of the arrangement
that the Committee has worked out with the Central Intelligence
Agency, we have been asked to request of Agency employees that
they waive their right to receive a copy of the deposition
for their own retention. By that, I mean we would certainly
be willing to grant you access to the deposition, to correct
it in any way necessary, but the Agency has requested that
we ask you to waive your right to receive an actualy copy of
the deposition.
Mr. Shaw. I have no problem with that.
Mr. Goldsmith. Thank you..
For the record, I would like to say that the Committee's
mandate is to investigate the assassination of the President.
The scope of the mandate includes who killed the President,
was there a conspiracy? We are also required to evaluate
the performance of the investigative agencies, specifically
the FBI and the CIA and to evaluate the work of the Warren
Commission.
Do you understand that as well?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Goldmsith. Prior to coming here today, have you
discussed what your tesimony is going to be with any CIA
employee?
Mr. Shaw. I have not, except to tell them that I was
going to tell the truth when I got over here.
Mr. Goldsmith. In terms of discussing the substance of
your testimony?
Mr. Shaw. None whatever.
Mr. Goldsmith. Have you discussed with any CIA employee,
past or present, who either has been interviewed by the
Committee or has given a statement under oath to the Committee,
what questions were asked of him or her?
Mr. Shaw. I have not.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you here today voluntarily and
without subpoena?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Shaw, how long have you been working
under State Department cover?
Mr. Shaw. Since approximately the date I came aboard,
because I was promptly sent to the Department of State for
training. That would be March, 1948.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would your State Department file, if
reviewed by a member of this Committee, indicate that you were
actually a CIA employee?
Mr. Shaw. I have no idea.
Mr. Goldsmith. You do not understand how the cover
arrangement would work between the Agency and the Department
of State?
Mr. Shaw.. I have never had anything to do with the
setting up of such cover. It would well be that there might
be some sort of an indicator or flag, or something in that
file that would indicate to a person who knew the ropes that
I was not bona fide.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would there be a personnel file on you
at the Central Intelligence Agency?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. As a matter of procedure, in terms of
how you get paid, do you get paid by the Department of State?
Mr.Shaw. No. I am under, at the present time, nominal
state cover.. I actually, as far as the Department of State
is concerned, resigned over there in 1973, I believe. At
the present time, I am paid by the Agency.
Mr.Goldsmith. When you were working under cover, were
you being paid by State at that time?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, I was.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you familiar at all with the
literature that has been generated by the assassination of
the President and the work done by the Warren Commission?
Mr. Shaw. Very little. I just noticed that green book
there a minute ago. I have never read that thing..
Mr. Goldsmith. Book 5, for the record, of the Senate
Committee Report.
Mr. Shaw. I have seen copies of the Warren Commission
Report in various places around the government, but I never
read it.
Mr. Goldsmith. When you were working with the State
Department in other than a nominal capacity, what was your
title?
Mr. Shaw. My last title was Special Assistant to the
Ambassador and First Secretary of Embassy, Honduras.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you ever work as a consular officer?
Mr. Shaw. Yes, I did.
Mr. Goldsmith. When you worked as a consular officer,
were you required to fulfill both responsibilities as a con-
sular officer and as a CIA employee?
Mr. Shaw. To a certain extent.
For example, I have never issued a visa. I have issued
a passport for another consular officer who accepted the
application and I would be on the road in northwestern Mexico
and issued the passport to the American citizen concerned.
I have done a modicum of what we call protection and
welfare work. This would usually involve being again on the
road, stopping in, for example, in a prison to see if there
was an American citizen there, to find out what the story
was, why he was there, how he was being treated and that sort
of thing, and relay that information to the consular when I
got back.
Actually, I have not done much consular work. I used
the cover on several occasions, but was never emersed into
the role to the point where it interfered with my Agency
activity.
Mr. Goldsmith. Normally when somebody is acting under
State Department cover, is the person required to hold down
two jobs at the same time?
Mr. Shaw. It depends on the location of the person.
As I understand it, people we have, for example, in the Iron
Curtain countries, or the countries of Eastern Europe, do
hold down virtually 100 percent full-time State Department,
Foreign Service jobs. Some of the people that I have run into
in my work as an Inspector for the Office of the Inspector
General, notably in the Mid-Eastern countries, have spent much
more time on their cover work than I did.
I think that it has to do basically with the permissive-
ness, or lack thereof, of the operational environment that
you are in. In Mexico, it was not necessary to spend much
time, at least not for me, on cover duties.
Mr. Goldsmith. How long have you been working for the
Office of the Inspector General?
Mr. Shaw. Since August of 1976.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you have any responsibility in the
writing of the 1977 Inspector General Report pertaining to
the CIA's handling of the investigation of the Kennedy
assassination?
Mr. Shaw. None whatever.
Mr. Goldsmith. Has anyone ever interviewed you before
pertaining to the Mexico City situation as far as it pertained
to Oswald?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. It was about that time of '76, some-
body interviewed me in the CIA Headquarters building, and I
think it was a Senate Committee, but I am not sure. They had
some files.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you give your testimony under oath
at that time?
Mr. Shaw. No, not that I remember.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did any CIA person ever interview you
concerning Lee Harvey Oswald's activities in Mexico City and
the operations of the Mexico City station?
Mr. Shaw. I would have to qualify that. We discussed
the subject, of course, in Mexico City at the time of the
assassination, or immediately after the assassination.
But I cannot recall that I was ever called in anywhere
and asked for my account of what transpired after the assassina-
tion.
Mr. Goldsmith. Headquarters never asked you to come in
and give a description, for example, of Oswald's activities,
to your knowledge, in Mexico City in 1963?
Mr. Shaw. No. I would not have known anything about
Oswald's activities anyway.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you familiar with the photograph
that was taken in 1963 that was reportedly linked to Oswald
and which subsequently turned out not to be a picture of
Oswald?
Mr. Shaw. I am familiar with a photograph that was
identified by people at the station in Mexico City as possibly
being an American-appearing person. I do not know that it
was every considered to be Oswald.
Mr. Goldsmith. We will get into that. My question is,
did anybody from Headquarters ever ask you about that parti-
cular photograph or the circumstances surrounding it?
Mr. Shaw. Negative.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did anybody from Headquarters ever ask
you to give a statement or report as to the manner in which
the surveillance operation in Mexico City were undertaken in
1963?
Mr. Shaw. No.
Mr. Goldsmith. Where were you serving in 1963?
Mr. Shaw. From about the middle of April, I was serving
in Mexico City in our station.
Mr. Goldsmith. How long did you stay in Mexico City?
Mr. Shaw. I stayed there until September of 1966.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who was the Station Chief in Mexico
City?
Mr. Shaw. Winston Scott.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would you give us your assessment of
his competence?
Mr. Shaw. Competence. It is difficult, because I was
not looking from on high. He was a brilliant man. He was
reputed to have a doctorate in mathematics. He had an uncanny
ability to remember numbers and he carried in his head the
file numbers of what we called P-files in Mexico City. P
stood, I think, for personality. A P number usually was four
digits or so, maybe five digits.
And he carried all these numbers in his head and he could
mark something for such and such a file in black ink -- he
always wrote in black ink -- putting the number down. He had
a very good memory for numbers.
Winn and I were friendly. We were not close. We were
not on the same level at all.
I considered him to be, from my standpoint, a competent,
effective, Chief of Station.
Mr. Goldsmith. What type of file-keeping system did
he have in effect, without asking you to describe it in detail?
By that, my question is directed towards his thoroughness and
comprehensiveness.
Mr. Shaw. I would say that he probably had one of the
most -- let me see -- complete file systems in being in the
Agency. I think that he, my personal opinion is that he went
overboard, and we had so much stuff back in our files, it
was hard to believe the amount of paper we had in there.
His tendency was not to rely on cross-indexing. If
you have a document, this piece of paper means something to
you and you want to keep it and it has 15 names on it, he
was quite capable of setting up 15 files for the same piece
of paper.
And we had a tremendous file room.
I often wondered if we needed that much paper. It was
very thorough. I am not a technician as far as managing
files, but I do know that the people who worked in the file
room were kept very, very busy.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who were Mr. Scott's chief deputies?
Let me rephrase the question. Upon which individuals did he
tend to rely the most?
Mr. Shaw. He had one Deputy who was Allen White. As
far as reliance on other people, I would say he relied very
heavily on Annie Goodpasture -- not in any way in a command
function, but as a Girl Friday.
He also seemed to think rather highly of a former one-time
FBI agent named George Monroe.
Mr. Goldsmith. What about David Phillips?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. Dave Phillips ran the, what we called the
CA side of the shop, covert action, mostly propaganda. I came
to Mexico City with the understanding that I was going to head
up the Cuban shop. Very soon after I arrived there, Dave
Phillips was tapped -- it was while we were still in the old
Embassy building.
He was tapped and named the new Cuban Office Chief.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did that happen in October '63?
Mr. Shaw. I don't know. I do not remember. But it was
not too long after I was there, and I was asked, I think by
Dave; I don't remember -- if I had any objections to continuing
to serve in Cuba.
I liked Dave, I respected him. I did not feel that I
was being hurt, hurt careerwise, to step back and I was very
interested in Cuban operations, so I did willingly, let us say,
relinquish command, if you want to, of Cuban Ops and I served
Dave as one more officer.
Later on, after Dave left, a year or two later, I once
again took over the Cuban Ops group.
Mr. Goldsmith. You were in charge of Cuban Operations at
the beginning. Then Phillips took it over at some point and
then, after Phillips left, you went back to that position?
Mr Shaw. That is right.
Mr. Goldsmith. Our review of Agency records indicates
that Phillips would have assumed that position on October of
'63. Would that be consistent with your recollection?
Mr. Shaw. My recollection would have been, had you not
told me this based on your review of the files, that it took
place earlier than October, but I do not know. I really do not
know.
Mr. Goldsmith. My questions are going to be confined,
unless I indicate to the contrary, to the period up to the
end of 1963. So, from the time of your arrival in Mexico City
until the end of 1963, prior to the time that Mr. Phillips
assumed the position of Cuban operations --
Mr. Shaw. Chief.
Mr. Goldsmith. Chief would be the word, and you had those
responsibilities, what did those responsibilities include?
Mr. Shaw. Since it was not ratified to me upon my
arrival that I was, indeed, Chief of Cuban Ops, I simply con-
sidered myself to be one more case officer working against
the Cuban target. Our basic interest was in effecting pene-
trations of the Cuban government.
What we wanted most of all were effective penetrations
of the Cuban Embassy, the Cuban Intelligence Service, and some
possible line-in to their communications set-up.
Mr. Goldsmith. In 1963, did you manage to place any
penetration agents in the Cuban Embassy or consulate?
Mr. Shaw. Did I?
Mr. Goldsmith. Did the station?
Mr. Shaw. There were two. I did not place either one,
and I think they both pre-dated 1963.
Mr. Goldsmith. Were those two penetration agents within
the Cuban consulate or Embassy at the time of the President's
assassination?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. One was in the consulate -- LITAMIL-7
was the cryptonym. L-I-T-A-M-I-L-7. And the other one was
in the Embassy -- L-I-T-A-M-I-L-9.
Mr. Goldsmith. What information did these people give
you after the assassination pertaining to the possible involve-
ment of the Cuban government?
Mr. Shaw. I did not handle LITAMIL-7, and LITAMIL-9. I
did handle,
Mr. Goldsmith. Who handled LITAMIL-7?
Mr. Shaw. I think that it was Ray Swider, but I am not
sure. I did not meet LITAMIL-7 until Ray Swider left the
country.
Mr. Goldsmith. You nevertheless have had access to the
information that this individual gave to Swider?
Mr. Shaw. I would normally have seen copies of contact
reports which were reports that we wrote -- any of us who were
case officers wrote -- after station meetings, and it would
have been normal for me, for example, to see any information
of consequence that LITAMIL-7 produced, just like it would
have been normal for any other case officer in the Cuban sec-
tion to see my contact reports on meetings with LITAMIL-9.
Mr. Goldsmith. In light of that, do you know what infor-
mation LITAMIL-7 gave concerning the Cuban government's reac-
tion to the death of the President?
Mr. Shaw. I do not recall, and I do not recall the
specifics of anything. You may have something in your files
with my name on it; I do not know what LITAMIL-9 produced.
I do have the recollection of the sense of feeling on the
part of those people that there was no exultation or jubila-
tion or happiness whatsoever inside the Cuban Embassy at the
assassination of President Kennedy.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did the penetration agents ever indicate
that Oswald had been to the Embassy and had stated that he was
going to attempt to kill the President?
Mr. Shaw. No, not that I know of.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did any of those agents ever indicate that
Oswald had had contact with the Agency with the Embassy,
rather?
Mr. Shaw. I would imagine that LITAMIL-7 probably did --
I do not recall it. But since she was in the consulate, and
since it was my understanding that Oswald's contact with the
consular field rather than with the Embassy field, I should
imagine, given the discussions that undoubtedly took place in
the Cuban Embassy after this assassination, that she probably
spoke about it. I do not know.
Mr. Goldsmith. What was the name of LITAMIL-7?
Mr.Shaw. I'd rather not give names.
(Discussion off the record.)
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Shaw, in light of your response, I am
certainly aware of the sensitivity of this issue and of your
concern for sources and methods, and I would also make two
points. One is that under the letter, you are free of your
secrecy obligation. At the same time, I am not about to rely
upon that letter to compel an answer out of you, because you
are here voluntarily today to help us. And, as I said, because
I understand your concern for a sensitive source in this case,
I am not going to ask you to state for the record the name of
either one of these individuals.
Mr. Shaw. May I say something at this point?
Mr. Goldsmith. Yes.
Mr. Shaw. It is my understanding that both of these
people are, if they are still alive, are living in Mexico and
I do not want to be in a position of revealing a name which
could harm either of those people. I notice here that it says
Mr. Goldsmith. You are referring now to the letter from
Mr. Carlucci?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
"To provide the affected person the opportunity to
receive guidance from me or my designees on the applicability
of this authorization, particularly to questions which are
asked."
I would like to get Frank Carlucci to tell me that I would
reveal two names of agents, if it is necessary -- or you can
find out from the file, probably, who they are.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Shaw, I understand your position.
I want to make sure you understand mine. I am in no way
forcing you to reveal a name. Once you had demonstrated a
reluctance to, then, as far as I was concerned, then the
matter was terminated.
Mr. Shaw. No problem?
Mr. Goldsmith. I will say that we will pursue this by
contacting the appropriate people at the Agency.
Mr. Shaw. I think if you requested the Agency for those
two names, it would probably produce them. I wouldn't want to
be the guy to say it.
Mr. Goldsmith. I understand your position perfectly.
I hope you understand mine.
Mr. Shaw. I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would not want you to go back to the
Agency and say that the staff of this Committee attempted to
compel an answer out of you.
Mr. Shaw. I will not say any such thing.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine.
For the record, would you spell the cryptonyms of these
penetration agents?
Mr. Shaw. One of them was LITAMIL-7 -- L-I-T-A-M-I-L -- 7.
The other was LITAMIL-9.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are these two agents still active?
Mr. Shaw. Neither one is active. I am quite sure that
neither one is active.
Mr. Goldsmith. For purposes of clarification, LITAMIL-7,
was that agent working out of the consulate?
Mr. Shaw. That agent was an employee of the consular
section of the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City. LITAMIL-9 was an
officer of the Embassy.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Shaw, on the question of the identity
of these two agents, when you go back to the Agency, could you
raise this question with the appropriate individual, appropri-
ate superior authority, and we will do the same so that some
time this week we can get together on that?
Mr. Shaw. I do not see any reason for us to get together.
You can get it from them, I am sure. It is just that I have
a rather strong feeling about protecting anybody who has
cooperated with us.
It is not that I consider you do not have a right to that
information, if you feel that you need it. It is just that I
cannot bring myself to reveal the true name of an agent unless
I am required to do so.
Mr. Goldsmith. I understand that concern. I certainly
respect it.
(Pause)
I have been informed by my researcher, Dan Hardway, that
the Agency is in the process of looking into this issue.
Mr. Shaw. Okay.
Mr. Goldsmith. At this time, I would like to get into
the area of the telephone taps that were in operation in 1963
against the Cuban Embassy and consulate. My first question is,
what responsibility, if any, did you have with regard to the
telephone tap operation?
Mr. Shaw. No responsibility. I saw the product,
usually.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who was the individual who was in charge
of that tap?
Mr. Shaw. I do not know whose responsibility it was.
I rather suspect that it may have been Ann Goodpasture's, but
I do not know for sure. I do not remember.
There were two telephone operations, two tap operations.
One of them was unilateral and one of them was joint with the
Mexican government.
Mr. Goldsmith. Which one was the unilateral one? By
that, I mean which phones were covered by the unilateral one?
Mr. Shaw. There was a mix, and I cannot recall which
were which. It may well have been that we were tapping some
Cuban Embassy phones unilaterally, and some of them were being
tapped jointly. I know that there was coverage on the joint tap
operation, which I believe was called LIENVOY. I am not sure.
Mr. Goldsmith. That is correct.
You indicated that you think Ann Goodpasture may have been
responsible for the telephone tap operation against the Cuban
operation. What basis do you have for that?
Mr. Shaw. Responsible in the sense of picking up the take.
I am not sure of that, because I know she did some of that kind
of work. I am not sure who did it. We used to get copies of
the transcripts and I remember -- I am sure I saw some of the
Cuban stuff on joint taps. And then, of course, taps that
were run by the Mexican government.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you review the transcripts that came
in as a matter of regular routine?
Mr. Shaw. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you read all of them?
Mr. Shaw. No.
Mr. Goldsmith. Which ones would you read?
Mr. Shaw. I would have been interested primarily in the
Cuban ones, and what they called the resuma -- it was sort of
a Spanish word for resume -- the resuma was a distillation,
if you will, of the digest of the joint tap that was prepared,
I believe, for the Mexican President. You look at the resuma,
which may be two pages, and you may have the gist of what might
be a whole bunch of pages of tap.
Mr. Goldsmith. Normally, you read transcripts of conver-
sations that took place on telephones of the Cuban Embassy,
is that correct?
Mr. Shaw. Normally, I read some of that stuff. I do not
remember whether I saw it all or not, because quite a bit of
it was processed by other people. I do not know who they were,
people on the outside, I suppose. And I read summaries of
what appeared on these things, but I remember also, at times,
seeing the verbatim -- Man Outside says so and so; Person
Inside, Woman Inside, says such and such.
Mr. Goldsmith. Sometimes you would get summary trans-
criptions of the summary conversations or English and sometimes
you would get verbatim translations, is that correct?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. I would see them, I would not get them.
They would go past me. I would see them.
Mr. Goldsmith. Was it more likely that what you would see
in verbatim form, conversations that took place, for example,
in Russian and had to be translated before you received them?
Mr. Shaw. I certainly would not see any conversations
in Russian, because the Cuban Embassy did not have any Russian
conversations. I cannot really answer that question. I am
not really sure I fully understand it. I do remember seeing
a variety of take, what we call take, from the various tap
operations. This take sometimes was processed into English.
Sometimes
the stuff that appeared in the resuma was in Spanish.
the conversations were typed out in Spanish and translated into
English. I prefer them in Spanish, because I am at home in
Spanish.
Mr. Goldsmith. How many people reviewed the take from
the surveillance operation of the Cuban Embassy and consular
telephones?
Mr. Shaw. I have no idea. I assume there were quite a
few. The stuff was widely passed around.
Mr. Goldsmith. As a matter of routine, how many people
would review them?
Mr. Shaw. I have no idea.
Mr. Goldsmith. How many people were in Cuban operations?
Mr. Shaw. I would guess five or six.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who were they?
Mr. Shaw. Dave Phillips.
Mr. Goldsmith. We are talking now about the period 1963?
Mr. Shaw. That is right. Dave Phillips, myself, Ray
Swider. I am trying to think of the girl's name. We had
various secretaries in there. I do not know who was the secre-
tary in '63. Peggy Magert. I'm not sure she was there at
that time..
Of course, Allen White would see it. Winn Scott would see
it.
Mr. Goldsmith. They would not review every transcript
or summary that came in, would then? Allen White or Winn Scott?
Mr. Shaw. I imagine Winn Scott; I do not know about
Allen White. Winn was pretty much, he tended to review almost
all of the paper that came in and out of the station.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you saying that there was no routine
procedure established for who was to review the take from the
Cuban telephone surveillance operations?
Mr. Shaw. I am saying that, when I got there, the case
officers in Cuban Ops saw this stuff that was routed around
through the station and that persisted during the time that
I was there.
Mr. Goldsmith. I am not sure that the answer --
Mr. Shaw. How that was routed, I am not sure.
Mr. Goldsmith. Did you customarily see every conversa-
tion that came in?
Mr. Shaw. I doubt it. I doubt it.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who would have seen the conversation and
decided that it was not important enough to merit your atten-
tion?
Mr. Shaw. I do not know.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who brought in the take from these opera-
tions to the station?
Mr. Shaw. I do not know that either, but it was my
understanding that non-official cover people on the outside
picked up the tapes -- don't consider this gospel, but this
is my understanding -- picked up tapes from the various listen-
ing posts, some of which had been processed by people in the
listening posts; some of which had not. But they, in turn,
either processed those tapes or took them to people to continue
the processing in case they had a foreign language in them, or
something, and then turn them over to the station.
Somebody went out from the station, probably with a little
attache case or something, and picked up takes again. It is
my understanding that the person primarily involved in that
was Ann Goodpasture, but I do not know for sure.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who was the first person that the trans-
cripts would go to upon their arrival at the Embassy?
Mr. Shaw. I rather suspect Winn Scott, because I remember
great numbers of those white pages that came across our desk,
had P numbers written on them in black ink by Winn Scott.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you know how many lines were being
tapped at the Cuban consulate and Embassy?
Mr. Shaw. I do not know.
Mr. Goldsmith. You reviewed the transcripts and summaries
of these conversations for two years and you have no idea how
many lines were tapped?
Mr. Shaw. No. This was fifteen years ago. I can give
you a guess.
Mr. Goldsmith. Sure. A best guess would be helpful.
Mr. Shaw. I would guess three or four lines. The primary
interest was in the Soviets. You had far more coverage.
That is a guess.
Mr. Goldsmith. Understood.
Mr. Shaw. I would guess, off-hand, two lines in the
Embassy, one line in the consulate.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you know if the Cuban consul's telephone
was tapped?
Mr. Shaw. If the consulate line was tapped --
Mr. Goldsmith. It would have been his?
Mr. Shaw. Probably it would have been his, but they may
have had a direct line in there. I do not know.
Mr. Goldsmith. How would a telephone tap actually work?
I am talking now about the actual mechanics of the tap.
Mr. Shaw. I do not know. I never had anything to do
with them. I know they used to take some of their taps at
what they call the junction boxes. These would be the boxes
out in the street where lines came in to be fed into this
central -- I would rather suspect that the joint operations
were mostly done at the central, since the Mexican government
simply could have issued orders, you will tap such and such a
phone.
Mr. Goldsmith. My question is oriented towards the
following. Once a tap has been placed on a line, would that
mean that all calls, ingoing or outgoing, on that phone would
be picked up, so long as the tap is in effect?
Mr. Shaw. So long as it is in effect, yes. Whether those
would appear in the transcripts is another matter. If it
was like a wrong number, or somebody saying pick up three rolls
and bring them home for lunch, probably it would not appear on
the transcript.
Mr. Goldsmith. Who would make that decision?
Mr. Shaw. Whoever transcribed the tapes.
Mr. Goldsmith. How much time would pass from the moment
that a call came in until the transcription passed across your
desk?
Mr. Shaw. I cannot answer your question with any preci-
sion. There was a system in the Embassy whereby if you had
a fast-breaking situation, or something like that, you could --
I sure would like to get the transcripts of such and such a
line fast, and that information would be processed and funneled
back in to the Embassy or into the station on a priority
basis.
I would guess, offhand, that it ran -- again, this is a
guess -- five, six, seven days.
Mr. Goldsmith. What about the high priority cases?
Mr. Shaw. Sometimes you can get that pretty fast.
Mr. Goldsmith. Within a day?
Mr. Shaw. Yes. We could have somebody looking for a
certain call, and I do not recall ever doing that. But it
was my understanding that if you expected some situation, that
you could levy a requirement -- for example, let me give you
a for instance here.
Let us suppose that we, the station, someone in the sta-
tion was going to make a recruitment pitch to a Soviet officer.
It would have been possible for the station to have organized
things so that there was a live body and not just a machine
hanging over phone calls coming in to the Soviet Embassy in
case the guy called up and said, let me tell you the discus-
sion I just had, or something like that.
This would be a little far-fetched, because a Soviet
would not be likely to handle it by phone. But in a case
where you are looking for something fast-breaking to protect
yourself, being on top of the situation -- it would not apply
much to Mexico, but if you had a revolutionary situation
breaking out someplace, surely there is a possibility of
getting information very quickly off any given line.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would the transcripts be reviewed by
you in chronological order?
Mr. Shaw. I got them in batches and I would review them
just in the order