Assassination Records Review Board
Final Determination Notification
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER : 180-10068-10355
RECORD SERIES: STAFF PAYROLL RECORDS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
December 8, 1995
Status of Document: Postponed in Part
Number of releases of previously postponed information: 7
Reason for Board Action: The Review Board's decision was premised on several factors
including: (a) the significant historical interest in the document in question; (b) the
absence of evidence that the release of the information would cause harm to the United
States or to any individual.
Number of Postponements: 2
Postponements: All the postponements in this document represent Social Security numbers.
Reason for Board Action: The text is redacted because the public disclosure of the redaction could
reasonably be expected to constitute an unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, and that invasion of
privacy would be so substantial that it outweighs the public interest.
Substitute Language: SSN
Date of Next Review: 2017
Board Review Completed: 10/24/95
Released under the John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992
44 USC 2107 Note1. Case#: NW 88326 Date: 2025
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : HSCA
RECORD NUMBER : 180-10068-10355
RECORDS SERIES : STAFF PAYROLL RECORDS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR : HSCA
FROM :
TO :
TITLE :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
DATE : 09/06/77
PAGES: 8
SUBJECTS :
HSCA, ADMINISTRATION
GIANGRASSO, DOMINICK K.
DOCUMENT TYPE : PRINTED FORM
CLASSIFICATION : U
RESTRICTIONS : 3
CURRENT STATUS : P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 07/07/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
Box #:1.
[R]
- ITEM IS RESTRICTED
Date: 08/20/93
Page:1
PAYROLL AUTHORIZATION FORM
(Please Use Typewriter
or Ballpoint Pen)
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Washington, D.C. 20515
To the Clerk of the House of Representatives:
I hereby authorize the following payroll action:
Employee Name (First-Middle-Last)
Dominick K. Giangrasso
Employee Social Security Number
219-40-9759
Employing Office or Committee
Assassinations
(Any erasures, corrections, or changes
on this form must be initialed by the
authorizing official.)
Effective Date
October 30, 1977
Type of Action
Appointment
Salary Adjustment
Termination (At close of business on effective date)
(If type of action is an Appointment or Salary Adjustment, complete the following information.)
Position Title
Staff Investigator
(If Committee Employee, complete appropriate item below.)
1. Standing Committee: Staff - Clerical or Professional.
2. Special or Select Committee: Authority-H. Res. 465 of 95th Congress.
3. Joint Committee.
(If Employee of an Officer of the House, complete item below.)
Position Number_____________ If applicable, Level
Step__
I certify that this authorization is not in violation of 5 U.S.C. 3110(b), prohibiting the employment of
relatives.
Date November 14 1977
Louis Stokes
(Signature of Authorizing Official)
Chairman
(Type or print name of Authorizing Official)
(Title If Member, District and State)
All appointments and salary adjustments for employees under the House Classification Act and for Committee em-
ployees, except those of the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on the Budget, and the Joint Committees, must
be approved by the Committee on House Administration.
APPROVED:
Chairman, Committee on House Administration
Office of Finance use only:
Office Code
Monthly Annuity $___________.00
Copy for Initiating Office or Committee
Gross Annual Salary
$24,000
MEMORANDUM
TO: Tom Howarth, Budget Officer
FROM: G. Robert Blakey, Chief Counsel and Director
DATE: October 13, 1977
RE: Mr. Dominick K. Giangrasso
In reference to my previous memorandum dated October 4,
1977 on Dominick K. Giangrasso, this is to inform you that
he has been granted administrative leave through October 31,
1977, which will be the date of his termination.
GRB:jl
Attachment
MEMORANDUM
TO: Tom Howarth, Budget Officer
FROM: G. Robert Blakey, Chief Counsel and Director
SUBJECT: Dominick K. Giangrasso
DATE: October 4, 1977
Mr. Giangrasso has resigned from the Committee
Staff for personal reasons. His resignation is effective
as of today.
PAYROLL AUTHORIZATION FORM
(Please Use Typewriter
or Ballpoint Pen)
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Washington, D.C. 20515
To the Clerk of the House of Representatives:
I hereby authorize the following payroll action:
Employee Name (First-Middle-Last)
Dominick K. Giangrasso
Employee Social Security Number
219 40 9759
Employing Office or Committee
Assassinations
(Any erasures, corrections, or changes
on this form must be initialed by the
authorizing official).
Effective Date
9/6/77
Type of Action
Appointment
Salary Adjustment
Termination (At close of business on effective date)
(If type of action is an Appointment or Salary Adjustment, complete the following information.)
Position Title
Staff Investigator
(If Committee Employee, complete appropriate item below.)
1. Standing Committee: Staff - Clerical or Professional.
2. Special or Select Committee: Authority-H. Res. 465 of 95th Congress.
3. Joint Committee.
(If Employee of an Officer of the House, complete item below.)
Position Number_____ If applicable, Level
Step
I certify that this authorization is not in violation of 5 U.S.C. 3110(b), prohibiting the employment of
relatives.
Date September 15 19 77
Louis Stokes
(Signature of Authorizing Official)
Chairman
(Type or print name of Authorizing Official)
(Title-If Member, District and State)
All appointments and salary adjustments for employees under the House Classification. Act and for Committee:em-
ployees, except those of the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on the Budget, and the. Joint, Committees, must
be approved by the Committee on. House Administration.
APPROVED:
Chairman, Committee on House Administration
Office of Finance use only:
Office Code
Monthly Annuity $.
.00
Copy for Initiating Office or Committee
Gross Annual Salary
$24,000
MEMORANDUM
TO: Mr. Blakey
FROM: Edward M. Evans
DATE: August 24, 1977
SUBJECT: Dominick Kevin Giangrasso - Investigator
Ο.Κ.
8-24-7)
Mr. Giangrasso has agreed to take a position with us
as Staff Investigator assigned to the Martin Luther King, Jr.
Task Force.
He will start September 6, 1977 at $24,000.
EME:ek
MEMORANDUM
TO: ALL STAFF
RE: Payroll Certification
The Regulations and Accounting Procedures for Allowances and
Expenses of Committees, Members and Employees of the U.S. House of
Representatives require that, among other things, the Committee's
monthly payroll certification include the relationship, if any, of
each employee to any current Member of Congress. This certification
is signed monthly by our Chairman.
The following are the relationships to be included in the
certification:
father
mother
son
daughter
brother
sister
uncle
aunt
first cousin
nephew
brother-in-law
niece
sister-in-law
husband
stepfather
wife
stepmother
father-in-law
stepbrother
mother-in-law
stepsister
son-in-law
half-brother
daughter-in-law
half-sister
Please complete the appropriate portion below, sign and date
this form, which will then become a part of your permanent personnel
file. If this status changes, you must notify the Committee's Budget
Office immediately of the change.
I am not related to any current (95th Congress) Member of Congress.
I am related to a current (95th Congress) Member of Congress.
(Please specify.)
O.K. Siangress
Sic ignature of Employee
6 Sept.1977.
Date
Dominick Kevin Giangrasso
7902 Wallace Road
Baltimore, Maryland 21222
(301) 285-2826
RESUME
PERSONAL
EVANS
RECEIVED
1977 AUG-8 PM 2:58
COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS
U.S. HOUSE SELECT
Born:
Health:
Appearance:
Marital Status:
October 26, 1942 Baltimore, Maryland
Excellent; last physical taken
Height 6' 4"; Weight 188 lbs.
Married
Lorraine M. nee Novak
Date of Birth Sept. 11, 1942
Three Children - Dominick Anthony
Lisa Ann
Derek Joseph
June 6, 1967
November 24, 1968
February 11, 1974
Religious Affiliation Roman Catholic
EDUCATION
Baltimore Public School system until 12th grade
High School equivalency received July, 1967
At present, I have earned 45 credits towards an
Associate of Arts Degree in Criminal Justice at
Essex Community College, Baltimore County, Md.
EXPERIENCE
January 10, 1964 sworn into the Baltimore City Police Department - finishing
3rd in standing of 27 graduates. Thereafter assigned to the Southeastern
District in uniform patrol that covered high crime areas. During this as-
signment I handled all types of felony and misdemeanor investigations and
arrests.
December 1967 transferred to the Criminal Investigation Division and assigned
to the Vice Control Unit. In this capacity was assigned to undercover work in
the areas of prostitution and gambling violations. While in this assignment,
I kept a low profile and learned to develop sources of select confidential
information.
In May 1968 was promoted to Detective Patrolman and re-assigned to the Crimes
Against Persons Unit - Homicide Squad, which is my present assignment. While
in this division, I have personally investigated in the excess of 225 homidices
and have been actively involved with another 150 homicide investigations. I
have also conducted hundreds of investigations into the areas of questionable
death, suicide, serious assault, kidnapping, armed robbery, extortion, threats
of death and hostage situations. For a period of about four years, have also
investigated numerous sex related offenses such as rape, perverted practices,
etc.
Page 2
As a result of these investigations, I have testified in the Municipal Court,
Criminal Court Supreme Bench, and the Grand Jury systems in the City of Balti-
more and State of Maryland. On most occasions, the Court recognizes me as an
expert in the field of homicides and related death investigations.
During my assignment in the Homicide Squad, I have acted in the capacity of
field supervisor for about 3 1/2 years, supervising 5 to 7 investigators and
their assignments. Have also had the experience of acting undercover while
with the unit and on two occasions I was hired as a paid assassin. During
these operations I worked with several forms of electronic equipment and
became familiar miliar with it.
I am acutely aware of how to search crime scenes; recover and preserve evidence;
examine bodies; interrogate suspects; locate and interview possible witnesses;
take full and formal affadavits and all other areas of homicide investigations.
I furthermore have written and have been named the affiant on numerous search
warrants and seizure orders.
It has been my duty on occasion to travel into other states and jurisdictions
and take custody of fugitives from justice and return them to this city to be
criminally charged.
During my tenure as a law enforcement officer, I have handled numerous line-
ups, surveillances, and details for the protection of suspects, informants and co-
operative witnesses.
I have a full training background in the area of handguns, shotguns, rifle and
tear gas devices.
TRAINING
Have completed the "Francis Lee Glasner" Homicide Seminar, held at the Medical
Examiners Office, Baltimore, Maryland, under the direct supervision of Dr.
Russell Fisher.
Have also attended and completed a "Federal Bureau of Investigation" seminar
on "Homicide and Sex Mutilation", held in Washington, D. C.
Furthermore, I have conducted and attended numerous training classes and pro-
cedure lectures held by the Baltimore City Police Department.
COMMENDATIONS
Since becoming a member of the Baltimore City Police Department in January
1964, I have been awarded the following commendations and citations:
Two Commendation Ribbons
Three Bronze Star Medals of Valor
Six Letters of Commendation
One Certificate of Achievement from
the American Legion
I have recently been recommended by my superior officers for the Department's
Medal of Honor for my actions during a sniper incident and the killing of a
police officer.

