180-10131-10324
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 10/19/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER: 180-10131-10324
RECORD SERIES : SECURITY CLASSIFIED TESTIMONY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 014724
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: HSCA
FROM: NOSENKO, YURI
TO:
TITLE: TESTIMONY OF YURI IVANOVICH NOSENKO
DATE: 06/20/1978
PAGES: 141
SUBJECTS: CIA, METHODOLOGY
KGB, FILES
KGB, METHODOLOGY
MCMILLAN, PRISCILLA JOHNSON
SOLIE, BRUCE
NOSENKO, YURI, TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
OSWALD, LEE, RUSSIAN PERIOD
OSWALD, LEE, RUSSIAN PERIOD, DEFECTION TO RUSSIA
MEXICO CITY
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: Top Secret
RESTRICTIONS: Consulted
CURRENT STATUS: Withhold
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 08/21/1993
OPENING CRITERIA : Folder 2 of 2. Box 4
COMMENTS:
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 1
1
TOP SECRET
2 TESTIMONY OF:
3
CONTENTS
YURI IVANOVICH NOSENKO
Resumed
PAGE
2
5
6
7
8
TOP SECRET
9
10
EXHIBITS
11
JFK F-2.
Marked
10
Received
12
JFK F-3
11
13
JFK F-4
18
14
JFK F-5
24
JFK F-6
32
15
16
JFK F-7
49
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 2
TOP SECRET
THOMAS,'srs
retype smnp
TOP SECRET
EXECUTIVE SESSION
Tuesday, June 20, 197876
U.S. House of Representatives,
Select Committee on Assassinations
Subcommittee on the Assassination
of John F. Kennedy
Washington, D. C.
The Committee met, pursuant to recess, at 6:20 o'clock
p.m., in Room 1-D, Headquarters, Central Intelligence Agency,
Langley, Virginia, the Honorable Louis Stokes (Chairman of
the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Stokes, Preyer, Burke, Fithian,
Devine and Sawyer.
Also present: G. R. Blakey, G. Cornwell, M. Goldsmith,
R. Morrison, E. Berning, M. Jackson, J. Smith, K. Klein and
S. Brady.
The Chairman. The Committee will come to order.
At this time the Committee will resume its sitting. We
are still in executive session by virtue of the resolution
adopted by the Committee this past evening.
At this time the Chair will recognize Mr. Blakey.
Mr. Blakey. Off the record.
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 3
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
(Discussion off the record.)
The Chairman. Anything further?
Bring the witness in.
Let the record reflect that the Committee has resumed its
sitting and at this time the witness, Yuri Nosenko, is back
before the Committee once again.
Mr. Nosenko, I admonish you that you are still under the
oath that you took last night.
TESTIMONY OF YURI IVANOVICH NOSENKO Resumed
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. And at this time, then, the Committee will
recognize the counsel for the Committee, Mr. Klein.
Mr. Klein. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good evening.
Mr. Nosenko. Good evening, sir.
Mr. Klein. You told us that after the assassination
you had an opportunity to be present when Oswald's file was
brought from Minsk, is that right?
Mr. Nosenko. Absolutely right.
Mr. Klein. Did you have an opportunity to read the entire
file at that time?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir.
Mr. Klein. How much of the file did you read?
Mr. Nosenko. It was simply looking, page by page, first
part of the first volume.
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 4
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Klein. You went through the first part of the first
volume, page by page?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. Did you go through any of the other volumes?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir.
Mr. Klein. You told us that an officer named Matveev
took the file away to prepare a summary?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. Do you know who wrote that summary?
Mr. Nosenko. The summary was written by the First
Department of the Second Chief Directorate.
Mr. Klein. Do you know who, in particular?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir, I do not know.
Mr. Klein. And did you ever have an opportunity to read
the summary that the First Department prepared?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir; I didn't see it.
Mr. Klein. The Russian word "spravka", does that mean
Mr. Nosenko. Is summary, right.
Mr. Klein. And why were you not able to read the summary
that they wrote?
Mr. Nosenko. Well, the file was taken in the First
Department. I was working in the Seventh Department.
Mr. Klein. Did you make any attempt to read it?
Mr. Nosenko. No.
Mr. Klein. Was it at all unusual that with all your
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page. 5
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
involvement in the case you did not have an opportunity to
read that file?
Mr. Nosenko. It was the decision of the Chief of the
Second Chief Directorate, given big importance to this question,
that a resume will be prepared by the most prestigious depart-
ment, American Department, and that is why we couldn't even ask.
Mr. Klein. You didn't even ask to see it?
Mr. Nosenko. No.
Mr. Klein. So it was not unusual that you were not
allowed to see it?
Mr. Nosenko. No, it was not unusual.
Mr. Klein. You have testified before this Committee that
the KGB did not allow Lee Harvey Oswald to defect because he
was uninteresting. You have testified the KGB did not even speak
to Lee Harvey Oswald because he was uninteresting; and that you
decided he was not interesting without speaking to him.
Do you know what year Lee Harvey Oswald came to the Soviet
Union?
Mr. Nosenko. 1959.
Mr. Klein. In 1959, approximately how many Americans
wanted to defect to the Soviet Union or requested permission to
defect?
Mr. Nosenko. There was a defectionist, I remember, one
of the employees, one of the workers, who was helping to or-
ganize the American Exhibition in Moscow, Mr. Webster.
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 6
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Klein. Without giving particular names, how many
Americans would you say asked permission to defect in 1959?
What would the number be?
Mr. Nosenko. These two were known to me Oswald and
Webster.
Mr. Klein. From 1955 to 1960, what would be your best
estimate as to how many Americans asked permission to defect
to the Soviet Union?
Mr. Nosenko. As far as I heard, there I think was one
only.
Mr. Klein. One other, meaning three altogether.
Mr. Nosenko. One besides Oswald and Webster, what I
know.
Mr. Klein. Three?
Mr. Nosenko. Three.
Mr. Klein. Of the three, was Oswald the only one turned
down because he was uninteresting?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. Do you know any other defector who was ever
turned down because he was uninteresting?
Mr. Nosenko. No.
Allow me to tell, as you have seen, and you told yourselves,
how many Americans are defected. It is a very rare occasion and
KGB prefers defection when they are planning, they want, these
types of defectors, they like and invite those people who can
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 7
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
give them certain information which is valuable.
Mr. Klein. Do you recall telling this Committee yesterday
that up until 1960 the Seventh Department was recruiting
left and right?
Mr. Nosenko. Absolutely right.
Mr. Klein. And that you recruited a woman in Utah who was
Mr. Nosenko. I simply had given example of this recruit-
ment which took place up to 1960. When Seventh Department was
recruitng and giving files to the Intelligence Service, First
Chief Directorate, not asking them before, is it person will
be for them valuable or not.
Mr. Klein. And that KGB officers were getting bonus
and promotions when they induced people to recruit?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. And despite that, Lee Harvey Oswald, when
he asked to defect, you turned him down without even speaking to
him, to find out if he had any information; is that right?
Mr. Nosenko. Sir, we had quite a few recruitments in '59,
a very big amount of them in '59 very interesting, much,
much more interesting professors and teachers -- and
even was a co-op from CIA we had quite a few recruitments,
and Oswald was nothing on this base, on this foundation.
Mr. Klein. Would the KGB have any interest in an
American student?
Mr. Nosenko. As I told you yesterday, KGB interested in
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 8
TOP SECRET
students, but particularly those students who are studying
the Russian language, Russian history, Russian economy.
Mr. Klein. And would they have any interest in an
American who had strong anti-American views and who was a
professed Marxist? Would they have any interest in that
kind of person?
Mr. Nosenko. Here were are coming to a very interesting
and sensitive question. From mid-1950, by the order of
Central Committee Communist Party, Soviet Union, KGB was
prohibited to make any approachment and recruitment of
members of the Communist Party of the West.
Mr. Klein. I am not asking about a member of the
Communist Party.
Mr. Nosenko. Your question is, and if he is some type
of Marxist here, the question maybe he is possibly a member
of Communist Party, and to check it for KGB very difficult
if he is a member of Communist Party or not of his country.
Mr. Klein. Would they ask him if he is a member of
the Communist Party?
Would they check it?
Mr. Nosenko. No, they would not ask him.
Mr. Klein. They wouldn't ask him?
Mr. Nosenko. No.
Mr. Klein. Would the Soviet Union be interested in
someone who was in the military and worked with radar equipment?
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 9
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Nosenko. It depends. If he was corporal, private,
is no big interest. If he was officer, maybe they would be
interested.
Mr. Klein. The fact that he worked with the equipment
wouldn't be enough; they would want to know what his rank was?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir; it is not enough because they
had sources.
Mr. Klein. And in 1959 would the Soviet Union have been
interested in someone who served as a radar operator on an air
base where U-2s took off and landed?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir; it would be very interested.
Mr. Klein. It is your testimony that Lee Harvey Oswald,
who was a student, who was a professed Marxist, who had --
Mr. Nosenio. Students? I never heard that he was a
student.
Mr. Klein. who had been a radar operator and had
worked on a base from which U-2 airplanes took off and
landed, that he wasn't even interesting enough for the KGB
to speak to him, to find out if he knew any of this information?
Mr. Nosenko. Mr. Klein, I understand your position,
but we didn't know that he had any connection with U-2
flights. That is one thing.
And if you, Mr. Klein, are basing on what was written by
Mr. Epstein in the book, it is a little bit from the air
taken ideas. Mr. Epstein even telling that how important
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 10
TOP SECRET
for KGB to know about such base that base. We knew it
in '50's when I worked in GRU at the Navy, in 1950, '51, '52.
We knew every base and in Japan, at this Atsugi Base, and we
knew what kind of airplanes had been. We didn't know about
U-2, no. Sure, it is very interesting, but when Oswald
applied, requested to stay in the Soviet Union, we didn't know
a word about his knowledge, anything concerning U-2 flights.
Mr. Klein. And you didn't ask him if he had any kind of
information about that when he wanted to defect, is that
correct?
Mr. Nosenko. No.
Mr. Klein. And you told us that one reason that no one
was working on Oswald was because all of your people were
concentrating on the American Exhibition in 1959, is that
correct?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir. Not only American Exhibition,
there were other tourists and among them were interesting
targets, very interesting targets.
Mr. Klein. You told us yesterday that things didn't
Mr. Nosenko. I can explain you why, because an American
Exhibition in Moscow was by the information which KGB had,
I don't know how much it's right, how much it's wrong, but it
was suspected quite a number of people from American intelli-
gence community who were working on American Exhibition in
Moscow, and when the work is going on against such targets,
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 11
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
it is not one officer, it is a big amount of people involved
on each case, because it is very serious target.
Mr. Klein. Do you know what date Lee Harvey Oswald
came to the Soviet Union?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir, I do not.
Mr.Klein. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that this
document be marked for identification and shown to the witness.
The Chairman. Without objection.
(The document referred to was
marked as JFK Exhibit No. F-2
for identification.)
Mr. Klein. Looking at this document --
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
The Chairman. Did counsel want to identify for the
record how the document has been marked?
The Clerk. JFK-F-2.
Mr. Klein. Looking at this document, does it say on the
top "Visa and Registration Office, Interior Department,
Executive Committee of the Moscow City Council"?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. Do you recognize that type of document?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes. It is from Department of giving Visas
and Registrations, which is working under auspices of Directorate
of Internal Affairs of Moswcow City.?
Mr. Klein. And does this appear to be an authentic
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 12
TOP SECRET
document, an authentic copy of the document?
Mr. Nosenko. Sure.
Mr. Klein. Looking at Number 8, does it say what
date Lee Harvey Oswald came to the Soviet Union for the first
time?
Mr. Nosenko. October, 1959.
Mr. Klein. October what?
Mr. Nosenko. October 16, 1959.
Mr. Klein. I would ask that this document be marked for
identification, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Would the clerk indicate for the record?
The Clerk. JFK-F-3, Mr. Chairman.
(The document referred to was
marked as JFK Exhibit No. F-3
for identification.)
Mr. Klein. Looking at the newspaper article clipping, on
the right hand side, with the heading "U.S. Fair in Soviet
Jammed at Close," do you see that?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. And what is the date of that story?
Mr. Nosenko. The date is September 4.
Mr. Klein. Are you aware of the fact that the American
Exhibition ended on September 4, more than a month before
Oswald came to the Soviet Union?
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 13
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Nosenko. Mr. Klein, I would like you to ask when
Americans who were working for this Exhibition left Moscow..
Mr. Klein. I will ask you another question.
Yesterday, when I asked you if things got back to
normal once the fair ended, did you say yes?
Mr. Nosenko. No, till they were leave the Soviet
Union. No. They are the same targets. Okay, you are right,
it is closed September 4th, but does it change the importance
of these people against whom KGB was working? They were
still in Moscow.
Mr. Klein. Do you recall yesterday my asking you, did
things in your department get back to normal once the fair
ended, and do you recall saying yes?
Mr. Nosenko. Well, I meaning fair ended when left all
the people involved in work on American Exhibition, Americans
when they left, and they were staying quite a long time
after it was closed. It was closed for visits for Soviet
citizens, but it took quite a time for them to leave.
Mr. Klein. You also testified yesterday that Lee Harvey
Oswald was allowed to stay in the Soviet Union after he said
that he was going to kill himself if they sent him home.
You told us that he slashed his wrists and two psychiatrists
examined him and both found him mentally unstable.
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. What was the point of having the two
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 14
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
psychiatrists examine him?
Mr. Nosenko. I think simply to be assured that it was
right found decision, concerning this person. Two independent.
After they examined him, the decision was
made to let him stay; is that correct?
Mr. Nosenko. It is not because of the examination
he was allowed to stay, Mr. Klein. You are a little bit mixing
things. He was allowed to stay because KGB and Soviet Govern-
ment had come to the conclusion if this person will kill
himself it will bereaction in newspapers, which can in any way
hurt the starting, the warming of Soviet-American relations.
Mr. Klein. The Soviets were worried he would kill himself
in the Soviet Union?
Mr. Nosenko. Right, if they would not allow him to
stay.
Mr. Klein. Could the KGB have taken him and put him on
the next plane out of Russia and thereby ended their whole
problem with Lee Harvey Oswald?
Mr. Nosenko. It is a very sensitive question. He can
jump out of car. If he decided, if he is mentally unstable,
you don't know what he will do.
Mr. Klein. Do you think the KGB didn't do that because
they were worried he might jump out of the car or do something
like that?
Mr. Nosenko. Simply a mentally unstable person, they
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 15
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
didn't want to go it on any such action.
Mr. Klein. They would rather keep him in the Soviet
Union?
Mr. Nosenko. No, they would rather prefer they washed
their hands, Mr. Klein; they are not making decision, KGB.
In Soviet Union decisions are made by the Central Committee
of the Communist Party, and General Secretary and Politburo,
not by KGB. KGB a servant of the Politburo and Central Commit-
tee Communist Party.
Mr. Klein.. Going by the facts as you have told them
to this Committee --
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. why wasn't he put on a plane and sent
back to America?
Mr. Nosenko. KGB washed their hands. Then from Intourist
it was given information Ministry of Foreign Trade; Ministry
of Foreign Trade reported to the Soviet Government. As I said,
I assumed the Chairman was surely asked; he told his opinion
of the KGB, and up to the Soviet Government how they would
decide.
Mr. Klein. Could he have been brought to the U.S.
Embassy and told them he is an American, "You take care of
him; we don't want him"?
Mr. Nosenko. It can be done, sure. It can be done, but
it wasn't done.
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 16
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Klein. Instead they elected to allow him to stay
indefinitely in the Soviet Union and they have to worry about
him every single day, what an unstable American would do, is
that correct?
Mr. Nosenko. They didn't allow, KGB didn't allow. Soviet
government allowed.
Mr. Klein. The facts as you have testified to them are
that the KGB allowed this mentally unstable person to stay
in Russia, and they sent him to Minsk to live and work in a
radio factory. Then the KGB allowed this mentally unstable
individual to marry a Soviet woman, and then this mentally
unstable individual was allowed to join a hunting club where
he had access to a gun.
Can you think of any other cases in all the time you
worked in the KGB where a mentally unstable person was
treated in thiskind of manner?.
Mr. Nosenko. I told you I do not know any other cases
of mentally unstable, excluding one code clerk, American, was
also mentally ill; he was delivered in Soviet Union. I heard
it. I never have worked with him, I never have seen him.
And the thing is, I am sorry, but you are putting and stressing
a number of questioning, and it sounds so peculiar. What does
it mean, KGB allow him to marry?
Mr. Klein, in the Soviet Union there is by degree of
Presidium of Supreme Soviet U.S.S.R. a law allowing marriage of
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 17
TOP SECRET
Soviet citizens with foreign. A foreigner can marry a Soviet
citizen, by the law. There is not a thing that KGB can in any
way try not to give, not to make it possible, but this is in
cases when the person who is marrying a foreigner worked in
some sensitive place, let's say, in missiles, rocket
industry production, was in process of any place of his work-
ing seeing classified material. In these cases, KGB will try
to put different type of fences. But it is unlawful. In
accordance with Soviet law, marriage is allowed; he doesn't
need to ask permission of Soviet Government or anyone. And his
wife, Marina, wasn't working in any place which was sensitive
from the point of view of Soviet security.
Mr. Klein. Mentally unstable it doesn't mean that he is raving
mad; it is mentally unstable. You testified that not only was Oswald not
spoken to when he first said he wanted to defect but even after
the decision was made to allow him to remain in the Soviet
Union, still nobody from the KGB spoke to him, is that correct?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. You also tetified to the extensive resources
that were devoted to put physical and technical surveillance
on Oswald. You told us the men involved, the time involved,
the facilities involved?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. Do you find great contradiction --
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 18
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir.
Mr. Klein. -- in the fact that, on the one hand, you
put all these resources into following Oswald around, trying to
see who he talked to and what he does and, on the other hand,
you don't even have a person go and talk to him and ask him,
"Tell us your background; tell us about yourself."
Is there any contradiction?
Mr. Nosenko. Even in the United States, yes, sure, for
you, for me just now American citizens, yes, sure, but there,
no.
Mr. Klein. They don't talk to people there?
Mr. Nosenko. They can talk and cannot to talk, but I
don't see contradiction there. Anyone, any foreigner who will
be staying, even if this defector not on his own, but, let's
say, KGB pushed him to stay, to defect, he still will be watched
and on him will be put this same type of work that was
put on Oswald, not less.
Mr. Klein. You talk about their society is different than
ours. Is it unusual that they allow an American to defect
and live there without ever questioning him, to ask him if he
is an intelligence agent?
Mr. Nosenko. On the contrary, no doubt, let's say he
was intelligence agent, what he will tell them that he was
sent with mission as intelligence agent? Why to scare him?
Let him live how he wants. We will be watching him. He
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 19
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
will show by his behavior, by his action.
Mr. Klein. They purposely don't speak to him; is that
your testimony?
Mr. Nosenko. In this case they didn't speak with him
because he didn't present interest for the KGB and because
he was mentally unstable.
Mr. Klein. You testified that you read the reports of
two psychiatrists who examined Lee Harvey Oswald at the
hospital after he cut his wrist, is that correct?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. You said both found him mentally unstable?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. You told us in great detail how this
decision was made to have these psychiatrists examine him.
I would ask that this document be marked for
identification.
The Chairman. The clerk will identify for the record
the number appearing on the document.
The Clerk. It will be JFK-F-4.
(The document referred to was
marked as JFK Exhibit No. F-4
for identification.)
Mr. Klein. Have you ever seen that document before?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir. I haven't seen it.
Mr. Klein. Were you aware that the Soviet Government
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 20
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
provided certain documents to the Warren Commission in 1964?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir. I wasn't aware of this.
Mr. Klein. Looking at that document in front of you --
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. -- is that a hospital record?
Mr. Nosenko. Oh, yes, sure. It is a hospital record.
Mr. Klein. And whose hospital record? Does it have a
name on it?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir. It is from Botkin Hospital.
Mr. Klein. Whose name is it?
Mr. Nosenko. Lee Harvey Oswald.
Mr. Klein. Does it say what date he was admitted?
Mr. Nosenko. Discharged, admitted 23rd, discharged
28th.
Mr. Klein. What year is that?
Mr. Nosenko. October of 1959.
Mr. Klein. And does it have on the bottom the diagnosis
why he was in the hospital?
Mr. Nosenko. Incised wound of one-third of the left
forearm.
Mr. Klein. And that date, October of 1959, is that when
Oswald first came to the Soviet Union and cut his wrist?
Mr. Nosenko. I cannot tell you dates, sir. I do not
remember.
Mr. Klein. You have in front of you the other document
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 21
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
which told Number 8 what date he came to the Soviet Union.
Is that still there?
Mr. Nosenko. No, sir. This is admittance to the hos-
pital and dischargement.
Mr. Klein. Number 8?
Mr. Nosenko. Arrival, October 16.
Mr. Klein. And the date on the hospital admittance is
what date?
Mr. Nosenko. Twenty-third of October.
Mr. Klein. And would you turn to the hospital admittance
form, the one I just gave you, to the third page, please?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes.
Mr. Klein. And do you see where it says "History of
Present Illness"?
Mr. Nosenko. No, I don't see.
Mr. Klein. On the third page?
Mr. Nosenko. I have the third page.
Mr. Klein. It has Number 6 on the top of the page, but
it's the third page on the document.
Mr. Nosenko. Oh, Number 6, History of Present Illness.
Yes. Just a second.
Mr. Klein. Would you glance through that and would you
tell us if this is the hospital report from when Lee Harvey
Oswald cut his wrist and was taken to Botkin Hospital?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 22
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Klein. Now, would you turn to the next to the last
page. It has a 13 on the right hand side.
Do you see that page?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir..
Mr.Klein. The next to the last page.
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. And do you see where it says, two-thirds
of the way to the bottom, "Psychiatric Department" underlined?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. Would you read what is said under that?
Mr. Nosenko. "His mind is clear; perception is correct;
no hallucination or deliriums. He answers the questions
legible and logically; he has a firm desire to remain in the
Soviet Union; no psychiatric symptoms were noted; the patient
is not dangerous for other people, his condition permits him
to stay in Psychiatric Department by an order of the Assistant
to the Chief Physicians, Dr. Kornika. The patient is
transferred to the Seventh Ward."
Mr. Klein. Is there anything in there to indicate he is
mentally unstable?
Mr. Nosenko. Here I do not see.
Mr. Klein. Does that report indicate that he was normal?
Mr. Nosenko. Here I do not see what I have seen. But
this you receive from the Soviet Government, and if you think
you received the true things, what was in file, you are wrong,
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 23
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Klein. And that document, according to you, is that
not an authentic copy?
Mr. Nosenko. KGB can prepare you any document. Take
the material, or ask the doctors who are cooperating with KGB
and they will prepare you any document.
Mr. Klein. I am not asking you what they can do. Are
you testifying that this document is not authentic, it is not
the document?
Mr. Nosenko. This document never was in the file of the
KGB.
Mr. Klein. So --
Mr. Nosenko. This I testify.
Mr. Klein. -- it is your tetimony that the KGB sent us
a phony document?
Mr. Nosenko. Yes, sir.
Mr. Klein. You testified before this Committee that there
was periodic physical surveillance of Lee Harvey Oswald which
was ordered by Moscow, to be carried out in Minsk?
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. And you testified in detail about that,
and you told us how the physical surveillance consisted of
following Oswald for a month or month and a half at a time,
and there were a number of people that would be involved, is
that correct?
NW 50955 DocId:32277209 Page 24
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
Mr. Nosenko. Right.
Mr. Klein. It was a big operation?
Mr. Nosenko. Big operation? No, it's not a big
operation.
Mr. Klein. There were a number of people involved, weren't
there?
Mr. Nosenko. It is not a big operation. It is routine.
In KGB it is a routine, nothing serious. It's not an
operation even. It's surveillance, it's not an operation.
Mr. Klein. And have you ever stated that the only cover-
age of Oswald during his stay in Minsk consisted of periodic
checks at his place of employment, inquiry of neighbors and
associates and review of his mail? Have you ever stated
that was the only coverage of Oswald in Minsk?
Mr. Nosenko. I stated before, and I stated it to you
yesterday, and I state now, that the order was given, and I
have seen it -- to cover him by surveillance periodical, to
cover him by an agent watching in places of his living, places
he is working, control over his correspondence and control of
his telephone conversations.
Mr. Klein. My question is, have you ever stated that the
only coverage was checking at his places of employment and
his neighbors and associates, and not say anything about
periodic, physical surveillance?
Mr. Nosenko. Sir, I cannot tell you what I stated. I was
NW 50955 DocId: 32277209 Page 25
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
for quite a big period of time, quite a few years, interrogated,
by hours, and in different types of conditions, including
hostile conditions.
Mr. Klein. That was by the CIA?
Mr. Nosenko. Where they asked questions in such form
which later my answer will be interpreted in any way, however
