180-10147-10176
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
stinaliter by
the silor.
120
G
response
A10
The CIA las
publicly
Box 61
A
stated that it were sitewwed le soc.
Harvey Oswald. Wernerons llegations.
as have anser over the yel
Since Dusident Kennedy's sevarmeation that Osused wither had
beer n should deve Men debriefed by the LTA upre is t
from the Soviet Union since he appeared to be in a prection to
Unused duratior
provide useful reformation due to the leagetyrsitet of the vese
duce and imployment there. The claim that no words wit
response
which induate a setreefing of sweld des multe speelstion.
that Osurild may ilave del some kind of Agency relationslip
with wreeuse the contact was not reported Harel normal.
channels or het ITA Cute wilt Osured in str
obviated())
soutise difusfing.
mancer wheel ellereted the
alleviatell?
the recessity for a routes
The HSCA Altempted to detumise: 1) wetter Dsereld wes in feet, ativiewed
by the CIA spor dis rette from te sormet Uuot; 2) white thee ss da
offered report of the warrelw if one the corrected; aels) to seesons why (stald
would not have deen wшыя ў
actuality
if Het was in fotelity,
the case.
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
10147-10/74
..De... response to the Warren Commissions request of
Intelligence Agency submitted
Johe & Melone Derector of the lestral satel
-
affidavet stating
Het the LTA had had no
elationship
The affideret,
dated 18 May 1964
never contacted lim, interviewed rim
of any kind with tee Harvey iswald ether"
stifies that "the Agency re
abede
talked with him on weird or soliected any reports or formation
fion dia
dea, or communicated with hin, derectly or indirectly in
(1): 570, 171266)
"Anya. Melones trastimony diefore the Horses Com-
asy other manner. A
ox mely 14,1964ge the Soonk
fits the same assertion on to the Agency's lack of contact
Specifically
with ith Oswald. We then melone was asked whether the
the LIA led hed
ary contact with Oswald during his stay in the Soviet Union.
Incione replied, "No, not to my knowledge, nor to the...knowliage
of those who would have been in a prettion to have made sull
(Women Lanussion Hearing: SH123).
He also responded.
intact, nor cording to axe
seerling b. any serd we leve. The
regatively to the question of whether the CIA had say pecusneй uxtart.
with Oswald sube uest to ince due to the lactic State (Ibid.)
wis it ov
KR
partcally
7
was it تا / Melone's effidevet was poca motigated by the appenale of
response
in resplommision
hiiren
An article on 23 y 1964 in the twice
made the following alligation:
"State Spectrent records show that sureld led several
meetings with the OTA supusetative in the 1.5. Intasy in Meow.
Quring this period, the axxas 192
suking to
мление
xel dis stizenship.
One State Aspectment cable, to 234, deted Nurnber 2, 1959, reports thet
Dswald was interviewed by the
th CIA and othenbe
N
unbssay Aficials (CTA
The ITA memisade suprating this finetton both ter
(CIA FOTA
mut=109-786).
211
1.
to the Hessee bonussion advises that this allegation is stally unfouted.
nemos
(id end CIA FOIA Acument #1610-263). He is explace that t
reference to the State Department cable" is assoneous and that the buned
to wheel the astrale
itale was
seferung in unditedly
a State Depertmect
despatel 10, 234, wheel wres Lated 2 Twenter 1959 fit the 1.5 intasiy
۱
in Moscow (id)) (not a
Sauring
- pusgraph)
*te nternal memorandum, the despate contained no state-
さん
nest nefuele that Richend E. Sayder, W10 was the Sund Suntary of the
3
1.5. Intary in Mracow and the
nike
Herly pusor mentioned by mene
LIA FOLH L.
be despatel, del any CIA connection (1=14-75
However, the entranden rekaowaded that holt Sayder and Edward
4. Freers, the State Depertmest official who signed the despoted, led
hed some past connection with the Agency. Snyder Ideen unployed
by the CIA for less than one year in 1950 wiken ike resigned in ням
Although the CIA'S
to assure a position with the State Department treas Aldava
eate the existere
story of igeney interest in
Freers, he was never extually employed by the A. (.).
The record of the lential Intelligence Agency throughout the years
As stated
_is consistent with ite position t
to the Narsex Commission
that the OTA never interviewed Lee Harvey Oswald. I grubary
1972 letter from Bernerd textured to the lassotect Avector of
the ITA sequerets my needs pertaining to a debringing of Dewald
by on se khalf of the ITA followering dis return fire the Soviet
Haise His request for information contrary to the Agency's purely
stated position appears to the generated by a statemest made by
Rice Hela on 14 April 1971 before the Ancican Society of paper
Editors that ... if there is a desce that if a preusete istiys travelling.
sroad chas acquired foreign afpination that cas de weful to the
American policymaken we are curtainly going to try to interview
(COALFOIA FOL. $961-927-46).
Jin Instiruvald ites Oswald as appearing appe to
to be such a person..
- Thither follows an exchange of letters Actween Funtuweld and
Angus M. Thuermer. who was
thellesistant..
I to the Quector of HI CHA
in which theuermer refers Fenstereld to the tastening of Metre end.
bradif
Heles before the Warren Connesson Three states that the.
bestinny
is still led; therefore the information you requent does not enat (CON FIN
Teri When Seaterweld responds to this answer with a requend for.
LCF962-927
Thuermeis own prition with respect to the words retter than conclu-
sises based upon statements of persons other than yourself Herme
unds the unclerze by stating that his previous respice was
:
"A simple declarative statement in the west prosible exterity. that..
the Agency-saver had any contact will. Osivrild and that, therefore,
the information sright by you in you letter of tubusy it does.
not wist and never did wist. (CTA FOTH Fee #37C-927-AP).
1978 the HSCA v
In April of 1978
de a state-
Lited at the ITA piorde
requested
ment as to whitter bee Howey Oswald was wes cortected, spoken to
or stewiewed by anyone directly or directly presenting th
때
The lycaey responded in the same mantel it had lived in reponding to...
sumous
espre requests from other sources, by way of referring the commetter.
AN
to the testemory of Heises and tretine before the Herve Common and to ieltsi
affidavit denying dey Agency content with Oswald stay the con
6
HTTPS
A 25 November. 1963 CIA Memorandum (Viây Weated in Has
On file LA FOTA 435 1757A) is the rally dreunested evidence
of any ETA interest in interviewing weld the f
Thomas B.
stated: d
sane, I called that is
in Sumner
written
Oswald the mess
: "As soon A
soon as I had heard Oswalda
-Sometime
Chief of the Branch & dat die w
the 1960- with the then thing and Deputy lief of the 6 Reverie
KUJUMP
Section the laying one of intervius thuge lentu on other suitable
M
channels. At the moment I don't recall of this was discussed while
Oswald and his family
wen en route to this cous
country or if it was
aftri then anural: LOIA FUJA Lechinent #435-173-A).
the
(a) was interviewed by HSCA. Hay on August 17.1978.
In this stewiew, the stated that he worked as Chef of the 6. Brad
Astra Jatorries of CA Employee
from Eptember 1960 watil his reassignment in September 1962. He
advised that the function of the 6 Bresel was to amend
information.
from defectors concerning details about Soiect life wheel would.
ide the Sovider (Ibid.)
then the used to assist perens working incide
The Branch also relied upon the IA's Contacts Bursion and
the FBT as sources
of this type of information,
is well is
collecting
information from the State Department and the press concerning
news in the Soviet Union. (Ibid., p.4)
Swing this interview flasin section of the dission
rectioned in the 25 November 1963 memo was that it took place
(Ibid, p.4).
during the last days of his thrive with the be this would
have preced the discussion sometime je July 1962. He stated that the
date uted for the discussion in the mens must have been error-
lous_es de was thevelling with
travelling with his family between segamento
1960 and did not begin his assigenent with
in the_summer_of 1960_
4-5)
the 6. Beaned, watil_September of that your Fit 8. 4-5,
(Casasin).
stated that at the time the Dewall use wes discussed,
1-
de sexed that Oswald must have been sent Hot of the Soviet.
:
Unior by the KGB. Herefore werersing caution, he did not attempt...
8-
to debrief Oswald what sugerated itat Osereld de derniefed by KUTUMP)
which represented the office of Operations on office which debusfed.
persons through its Contacts sursion or other suitable channels"
by wheel he meant the FBI of the Immigration and naturalization
(Ibid., pp.4
.4-5)
stated that
Sevice. He didnt le did not believe that this had been dove ot
this
that time because andal type of formation would have been 100
passed on to the CIA and to his section of sell 2
Ibiclyps)
chuping
routinely-
dek
occurred flower metion de had on Oswald it the tine 222_n.
the form of State Depertmest dispateles. (Ibid.)
Je the memorandum Casasin) states that he told his subredinates
something to the effect of Don't push too hard to get the infromation
(ETA FOJA Rocument #435-173-A).
we reed, because this indurdual looks odd. Atte explained in the
interview that this statement reflected the CIA's assist of.
Oswald and in the Unusual facts that Oswald was. persected by
the Soviets to remain in the USSR and.. was further permitted to marry
a Soviet thiyen (HSCASH Ici of In. Employee, 5/17/13, 5.).
8-
(i)
stated that_dis interest in Oswald is expressed in the
__memorandum was just a dead and that it was set unusual that the
(Ibid. p.9)
had been as follow-up regarding a debriefing of Oswald he wrote
20 memo at the time of the develesneon as it was not ustomary to write
ainos
segarding
tismissed as
leads that were des
as seeng pratit
weled
sad and subfequently
experimportantes. (Ibid)
10
Welter P. Haltigen), the person to when
25 November 1963
wiff
letter was writtes was the employed by the LIA le
(HSLA Staff Everview of off Employee, 6/13/78, p.1) (Haitigens ruspllection worse is
the Soviet section of the Paris station
take with HSC staff en het bestee of the rate of
(Casasind. position weten (ox-official) or ( uy
__ wrote informal menos sued as the one in POIA #435-173-A W
were then proced on through the use of ust-outs to the Carvis station) (End)
these memorande would haar be forwarded to TA Headquartus.
Haltiga Nowever in the
However, in this parttinter waterce, Rotent I.
geally however
Kempuly, whe
whe sewed water.
stages wived
ved and fourarded.
the memorandum to Headquarter
aquestes in
was in the desitel
Ibid.)
(Haltijan) copreneed the general agency spirisether that had the LIA
wished to contact & stirring sepector, it would have dore so through...
10-
rettrining defectors.
A
the Contacts. Kursion of the ...
Heffoffice of Operations but that it was not standard.
procedure to interview becallse thes you fell within the FBI's.
operating
jurisdiction. (Ibid., p.2)
Thoes)
also tolk the HSCH.
Glasasen/ptated that the LTA dad e spreefee nitrust in k
24 it was
cessor knows that the city contained some type of special design plasts...
But may have mustved auration, nuclear energy or hacteriologuel
Storm Interview of CTA. Employee, p.5-6). Classic
Hawk
frontly tough le did not see that 140. 10.
- he setured Hat..
فانا
working in sey type of security facultyperyong would love been a
the area of those plants would leave been of interest to the Agency.id., p.6).
Howeves, eves with the presence of the deugs plants, Miku Wh
ella.
not dectified as a security on military purity eva (Ibid.)...
(sin) believed that the LTA menteived a serge violence of
Ibid.)
eformation on the Binsk redis fectory in which Osorld worked this
information was stored in the Office of Liverel and Reporting Hilf
03
who worked in the Fourments мы
in the Soviet March of the Strofe in 1962.
13
--
BA
told the #SCA. Hat de specifically willed wllecting there.
regerding
the thusk Redis Plaut. (HS: Tetersize of CIA Englis
p.1).
93 claims that, dur
duung
He summer of 1962. Je reved
He
a cortest report from reputatives of the A's work fuld
office wis tweed a former Marise who had worked it the
Hack Radis Plait following din sepetion to the USSR Ti214
pos may leve dure Osureld, led. Ween
Jury
with his family in Bensk. (Ibid. (iely) sdirsed to brunettes that
the content report was
Lowering the Black Redis Plast
filed in a volume corre
wliet should be retrievale from the sedustrial Registry Brand,
the component of the office of Central Referee 562 )
The HSCA requested that the IA provide the loanttee woth the above
Eisenbed content report and to volure of motoasts concer
Redis Plest.
I www
of te tousments in the islered
½ Prince Redis Plest versied that no sued content report wisted in ther file.
14
TK 612.023).
3
BR
ナー
The file review sed indicate that in 1975, Damel Schon urd
made a similar request and was formed by the CIA that no suck
repret uxisted. Ibid;)
The Select Committee on Asrasverations requested that the central.
Sateligence Agency provide a written statement indiesting wetter.
the CIA
Whelter, from 1958-1963, interviewed on desiefed returning American
+
defectors to the Soviet lacon as a matter of standard operating
(HSIA letter to LEA, 4/5/78).
-procedure, f the Agury
was ales requested to indirecto the crecen-
stances under which in interview wereld we initiated if sues inter-
views were not conducted as standerd
operating procedure... (Ibid.)
The Agency's respone indrested that the Counteruntelligence Staff
reviewed the files of 117 persons who had defected to the USSR
Setaren 1958 and 1963 and whs dad subsequently returned to the letted
islanduin B. Hugh Tovar to Special Assistant to filo for cxternal Oversigjit, 4/20/78)..
If Murandum
States // This wrew revealed that only ten of the 117 indurbuals had.
den
by sey component within the CIA
Stotel
contacted and that the LTA had no proudure for the systemstie.
(Ibid.) the docacy maintained that
derefing of sucl persons. Hettrad the ortacts that were witrated sp.
peared to the Seved on opportunity.
and curcumstance Ibid.).
Axotter.nemorandum explained that the CIA had no standard.
perating procedure with suspect to debriefling raterning American defectors....
6161
人
as the Agency relied upth the FBI for reporting the results of interviews.
It may have conducted in connection with the Mepsasilelety for uteral
COCA Plembranciners, Fovar to Special Asst. to this for External Oversight 5/25/78).
security matters the agency further stated that there were as mens
regulations for the period of 1958-1963 which splifically addues the sitte
jeet of American defectors (Ibid.)
In fact, the ten persons with whom the ITA admitted levrey.
had estart did not stuetty meet the speelfie requirements as eas-
ted in the H.SCA'S request. Sves of the the waveduels het sot actrelly...
defected to the USSR
during the period 1958-1963, but had resided
LITA Phenic from Tovar, 4/20/75/
thue for at least the yers prior to 1958 / three of the the indur duals
Abid
vettined to the United States and were siloscallently debriefed after 1963.
The CIA employee who conducted the reseered in preperation for the
Agency's response told Be HSCA that the requirements de had utilized in er
riving it this conclusions ided bee sorcewthat bronder than Hooded requested 14
in mau to melinde ill those pesses regarded as lefectors who шие Леnding
in the Soviet Union diuing the time period in quester, retter ret thes just there wts
acterally depicted at that time. (ASIAS of 1/26/75).
:
17
The House Select Committee on Assassinations conducted a
review of defectors files in order to determine whetter defectors
Other Has Osprald were sor
were soutinely debriefed upon their return to
United States the Committee requested that the CIA pinede a
the
list of persons travelling to the Soviet Union during the period from.
1958b2_1963, nel
metuding.
both visitors and those persons considered by
the Izeney to be "defectors"
Ja yaptase,
1
LIA
as proveded a
computer listing of
380 mduduals entitled "1.5.
5
Rewons. Who Have Dr. May Have Defected to the USSR Between 1956-1963"
Hugh Joier
4.5. persons,
stated that this cluting represented nadbordecal, meluding some mox ---
U.S. ectijcns who owed some measure of allegiance to the United States,
lad
who had either defected of skove some intention
wettin
- of defecting to the
USSR you the requested time period. retaining 75 Where I a b : A think
As this list was compile from a more detailed computer program
18
15
bi ke
Teukprovis
"Brooks,
goos en aml
and
1
on American defectors,
a more detailed description conce
creening.
Hese
indviduals was requested and provided in an expanded version of
to Higical livet. This mackice listing mcluded the following infor-
mation when co
ulwant or available
usch indurdual: name date and
weekly for wack
and pleee
of birth, 201 file number arrival in soviet Union, departure.
J. Sont Unis, employment in Sovet Union, most current address,
and other miscellaneous information compiled from the individuals
201 file and for third agency documents sigarding this indurdust.
!" Expaniele per thest of il. S. in....")
The Committee compiled a list of persons who appeared More
the reformation sellable in the Agency's expended text, bo de ll. S.
itizens born in the United States, wes defected on attempted to defect
to the Soviet Union between the years of 1958 and 1963 and who se-
In addition,
Hurned to the United States within the same period of time. soon -
the Committee weluded-
readed vendurduels from an October 1960 State.
request for
Set
itese
Department information from the OTA regeringsperson whore.
they considered to the defecths to the Souvret Won or Sovet blse countries.
A
The HSCA requested files of borety - nice durduals who fit the
above-sexcviber criteria and the. CIA provided files on swenty-light individuale
be when they me
they mastrived
ery existing
Lase
ecords. Both 201 files.
were rewed as well
Donente contact Revision files regarding these persons.
The HSCH file review revealed that in the cave of sth of the adviduals, thue...
words
is no indication that tay sorr
to the Walted States in some of
these caves the files contained a sport from a source who wowed in spoke with
→
the subjiset and ich reported to contact to the CIA, but there is 120 ixdece-
of direct cratect with esy of these peretes on the part of the ITA
shows thet
Le regard to the otte weaty - tor defectors, the file review diatas
He is no word of ITA contact with lighters of the gia for of have..
of then watch
the Azury of
files contain a reports by a stueesoto edirsed the
oni file regarding a former military person eratsine e report of a derefing
eved by military utiligince 1)
The clusters of the
the HA's extent with the fire linerning petas
diffind in will use the file of He sturdieel efects thet de had.
20
actually
iweza lung in the USSR suce 1933 sed vetttreed to the luted
in 1964
States in 1962. He uses debriefed by a
29
spectrust
(sever ofthe applying for unployment in usporne to a swrapper -
tesnent (
was raw
Moovie) Another returning sepetor, Verold trynell
rawittingly nowrewed by a CIA
H
10
A be amevcut untasy in open...
leges upon his departure from the Soviet Union in route to the United States.
While ad file indicates that the Agency considered it stable
that a
the IA red FBI de conducted
full and cratitled debriefing by the
and begletre wrote to the FOT suggesting & joint disipling, there is so
urence in Fornells 20 file vor in any ocs druments which suggest
furter watert on the part of the LIA...
More extensive debriefings were conducted of the other tos seputers. Ritect E.
Hist plestus expect with the Reed Development Corporation whose.
lifection to the Soviet Union in AS9 was highly putted, returned to the
United States in Jure of 1962. Het de leer exployed in the
Serectile Institute of Phytickle tasties.
Street Unive it the
Rengiad Suthe
21
اح
BR
Shorty after his rettive to the Waited States Mister pre deorefed in des
Joxe tantry by sepresentatives from He CIA's office of Operations κα
in wijunction with seitsentatives
Se/o inepter the dis tree st was decided that a pre votersive
debriefing was in rider and ebasta was subsequently brought to the Washingtor,
D.L. area where he was breed for a period of two weeks. The debufing
reports welude a chronology of Kereteis life and the CIA's Messment of
ilim as well as a large body of reformation regarding life in the Soviet
Union, Hipster's work thue and Mographee formation on persons he
ill
mot during ilis usederes hui
soon,
Likewise tices Riccrdelli who had lived in the Soviet Union for
rearly for years, was wotected for purposes of dibreefng ty tr
shis return to the Waited States Milste Jure of 1963. His witial debuefing
weluded sued subjects as die motuation to defect is ite USSR be well
se. well as setirties ingaged in during his onero stay, weletion.
from Moser to uw and rued aspects of life sued is residence cotties.
D.ed costs. Ditile the CIA fuit it was unferible to teorief Recuerdelle.
22
more Hormighly sum. to his cinct status of Attempting to ugais 11.5.
etizenship, the Agency sxpressed in interest in
whiting more information
on suck tapees as cost of living, sideel we, consumer goods, lytwaye,
transpretation and restructions upon travel within Kie...
It. hermes har firm the wiew of files on base defectors that difing.
by the CIA
of sefectors was, in fact, somewhat of
the instaress in wheed the
А галдок сени. However.u
the Agency did. eksose to debrief rettining.
defectors, the igercy appeared to be interested in toples of general interest
regarding life in untais aves of the Soviet llews: In this regard, 12 pisosa.
who were destruped were similar to isoald in that they deputed sed estrused.
itten
sael
one the same general time period and pics spent his time in the strest
Unior in arves of attest to the CIA..
2.3
It appears from
won an seanisation of all walelle materials,
that Yeu Hawe
Interweisund by
the CIA
following
Mis setara to the United S
Howey Oswald we act w
States from the Suret
Souret Union Atticip
persons in a breed of the souret Russia Aversion. uxpressed an.
witrust in interweg Oswald, they never followed up.
Collection
There is also as induction that the ot
on this veltust.
of the affe
of Operations inttwewed Oswald.
While the CIA did conduct towers of some tourists was
visited the Soviet Unio
the
-1963 as well as the
during his period. 1959-1963.
Americas eutigens was defected to the Soviet Union and the released to..
the Wested States, there was no standard policy to utiwrewell pusors.
nuttle
istegory. Thus, the fact that Oswald was not_intewiewed
wrs: more the rule than the exception sccording to preces followed
by the CIA at that point in time.
HSCA
was odrisch hot
of time of
Oswald's Nam, there
worl
mamy Suvich
cilizans lesντας
VISR
& debieting
propran probably concentralny
24