180-10145-10295
5
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
!
TRANSMITTAL ..
JCUMENT RECEIPT
Mr. Robert Morrison
House Select Committee on
Assassinations
3381 House Annex 32
THE DOCUMENTS LISTED HEREON ARE FORWARDED FOR:
INFORMATION
ACTION
CONTROL NUMBER
DOC. DATE
9 June 1978
FROM: Office of Legislative Counsel
Central Intelligence Agency
Room 7 D 35
Washington, D.C.
20505
XXXXX RETENTION
LOAN
SUBJECT (Unclassified preferred)
CLASS.
lar 73
Sanitized Notes of Betsy Palmer we OS file
on Manuel Antonio Ray y Rivero
S
14 Feb 70
on CAS
Samitized Notes of Betsy Palmer re file
Alpha de
S
SIGNATURE (acknowledging receipt of above documents)
DATE OF RECEIPT
FORM 37728
10-76
THIS COPY IS NOT
FOR RELEASE.
APPROVED FOR ISEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICANNREVIEW PROCHAM
RECEIPT
19588
3
RETURN TO OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
ROOM 7 D 35
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20505
1 WHITE, RETURN COPY
2
PINK, ADDRESSEE HOLD BACK
3 CANARY, OLC HOLD BACK
10145-10295
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
May 1, 1978
Cable Traffic, Mexico City/Director
October 1963
:
#72527 to MEXI from DIR dated 10/1/63
1. Basic Hdqtrs position
assist any responsible anti-Castro
group. JURE qualifies. L/2 can give covert assistance but not jeopardize
his ops utility. Recommend Lanier contact be maintained.
2. Julio Lanier Hevia one of original members Pro-Unidad Cubana
en Exilio formed February 1962.
3. Manolo Ray and Ernesto Betancourt (MEXI 6255) of ELC have had
dealings in past and jointly held discussions with U.S. govt. on Cuban
problems. Possible therefore Lanier and Betancourt approaches related.
#79557 to MEXI from DIR, dated 31 October 1963
01
1. Do not wish MEXI station intervene wit Mexi foreign minister
behalf JURE reps as this would obviously establish official U.S. support
JURE. Hdqtrs not aware Liſtamilk) has foreign minister contact but if he can
assist on visa problem no objection. Might be useful L/2 make pretense of
helping in order appear cooperative to Lanier.
2. Angel Luis Guiu Figueredo was chief military operations MRP
in Cuba until took asylum May 1961. WAVE asset mid 62 to mid 63. Rogelio
Cisneros Diaz is member JURE Executive Board and former national coordinator
MRP in Cuba.
#6455 to DIR from MEXI, dated 9 October 1963
1.
JURE rep in Mexico, Julio Lanier Hevia, told Liſtamil, 2 that
1/2
long-range seaplane lined up for use against Cuban soil. Currently used
commercially haul shellfish. Based near Tampico. Two JURE leaders coming
Mexico soon to inspect it. L/2 will try elicit more details.
c/s Comment: Requested timely reporting re any air strikes being
planned or mounted against Cuba by anyone.
Cuban ambassador to Mexico, 1963
Joaquin Hernandez Armas
SECRET
A
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
2
M
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
SERGIO ARCACHA SMITH
September 14, 1965
I Loose Documents
II 201-835474
Reply to the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization
Service from DD/P stating: Reference is made to the request
dated 23 August 1965 concerning Subject (File No. AL 055 004 TC)
The files contain no pertinent additional information to that
previously forwarded to the FBI in CScl-3/764,414
dated 30 March 1961, subject: Friends of Democratic Cuba
In yellow manila envelope: Letter to agency dated
23 August 1965 referred to above.
(Personality File Action Request)
[$$$$$$$$//f/$$$$$/ $$/ $$$$$$]
Attended college in Havana
June 25, 1968
A graduate of Columbia University Law School
Served in Cuban Diplomatic Service before Castro
New Orleans delegate of Frente Revolucionaria Democratico in 1960
Additional info in File 100-300-017.
June 9, 1967 Memo for Record
Reference: Brief Comments re: FBI Report, DBB 78940 of
25 April 1967
States: Other sources have stated that Gordon Novel and
Arcacha Smith have "marquie" letters granting them immunity
and are allegedly employed by CIA.
Garrison's investigation started when Everett Gordon
Schaeffer (phonetic) took a deposition from David Ferrie
in which Ferrie admitted knowing Lee Harvey Oswald.
November 13, 1975 (outgoing message: on Smith for Customs.
DPOB 1923, Cuba. Lawyer: FBI has further information on him.
SECRET
Sergio Arcacha Smith
Page 2
Betsy Palmer
SECRET
Third Agency Deletions
1. FBI document (DBC-00999) dated 21 Feb. 1967, Classification: not given
Subject: Assination Assassination/JFK Nov. 22, 1963, Dallas, Tex.
File not given.
2. FBI document (DBB 78198) dated 30 March 1967, Classification: not given
Subject: Assassination/JFK Nov. 22, 1963 Dallas, Tex.
FBI File#: (s) 62-10960 (Bureau)
3. FBI document, DBB-77295, dated April 10, 1967
Classification: not given
Subject: Assassination/JFK, Nov. 22, 1963 Dallas, Texas
FBI File#: Not given
:
ССРОСТ
1
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
May 1, 1978
SERGIO ARCACHA SMITH - Office of Security File Review
April 28, 1978
1. Search Request on 4/6/67
2.
Report deleted, dated 7/19/61
-
Third Party Information
3.
Sergio visits survivors of Cuban exile infiltration of U.S. who landed
in New Orleans and were hospitalized because of their weakened condition.
He tried to see them on 3 May 1961 but entrance to the hospital was denied
until his bona fides could be established. Visited them on 10 May 1961.
Arcacha then head of New Orleans chapter of CRC.
warrent
4. Washington Start article, dated 1 April 1967 on Garrison proble
issued for Arcacha's arrest on charges of conspiring to burglarize munitions
bunker in 1961 with Gordon Novel.
5. Bio memo undated. Sergio Arcacha Smith one of promoters of Friends of
Democratic Cuba in New Orleans, 6 January 1961. Investigation conducted by
a reliable Miami Station asset concluded that FRC organized for personal gain.
6. FBI memo on FRD, 1/18/61, New Orleans, deleted.
7. Memo dated 31 May 1967 by Ramond G. Rocca
Subject: Garrison and the Kennedy Assassination - Gordon Dwane Novel
A. Summary - Novel has both claimed and denied CIA affiliation
a thorough check of CIA records shows no affiliation. It is possible that
NBC is supporting Novel to get a large audience for expose of Garrison.
Novel may have exaggerated his presumed relationship with Sergio Arcacha
Smith who also is not CIA affiliated.
--
--
B. Novel is mysterious little information
owner of bar in French Quarter and an electronics expert.
--
--
29 year old former
-
C. In Columbus, Ohio, Novel is free on $10,000 bond living in a
rent-free apartment and drives a car with dealer tags. Rocca questions where
money is coming from.
D. Novel in McLena) Virginia 25-26 March 1967. Given a polygraph
by Lloyd Furr. Furr and Richard L. Bast operate firm Redex sell audio
and counter audio devices.
E. CIA finds no evidence of ever having an Evergreen Advertising
Agency which Novel claims he worked for and was CIA front.
F. Records show CIA never recruited or paid Arcacha directly but
since he was associated with FRD in New Orleans, which was created with CIA
assistance, guidance anf financial support may have been given him through
the Miami FRD circa May 1960.
二
1
SECDET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Page 2
Office of Security/Sergio Arcacha Smith
8. Memo dated 28 Septembar 1967 from Donavan E. Pratt
Subject: Garrison Investigation Queries from Justice Department
Questions prepared by Deputy Assistant Attorney General/ Criminal Division.
A. During 1948-56 period of his association with CTA, what
services did Clay Shaw perform for agency?
(Shaw submitted information on international trade which was
incorporated into 8 reports
East German directory of firms
engaged in such trade; a Czechoslovakian Trade Exhibit; foreign
exchange problems in Peru, etc.
:
DCS has to supply this information.
B. What was his remuneration?
C. What were his contacts:
(Contacted by DCS representative in New Orleans seven times 1949,
twice 1950, five times 1951, nine times 1952, once 1953, twice 1954,
twice 1955 and twice 1956.
C. What was reason for cessation of relationship? Files dont'
answer
-
DCS must furnish answer.
Questions about Sergio Arcacha Smith same memo.
one.
A.
What was his exact relationship with Agency? Never a direct
Miami FRD headquarters may have mentioned CIA sponsorship to him.
B. What was Agency interest in and support of FRD? Answered
above. In the CRC? Had direct access to and support of White House and CIA.
No record
C. CIA interest/support of Crusade to Free Cuba Committee?
Wheck with WH/COG
-
Questions about Gordon Novel
same nemo. No CIA connection with Novel or
his attorney, Steven Plotkin or his former business partner Rancier Blaise
Ehlinger.
Questions about Jack Ruby No CIA relationship or file.
David Ferrie - No CIA relationship
Richard Rudolph Davis No CIA relationship
Alvin Beaufouef No CIA relationship
Guy Banister or Hugh Ward no CIA relationship
De Mohrenschildt
Is CIA tapping Garrison's phone no
no
Marine training site at Atsugi was removed from the U-2 area to which the
Marines did not have access.
1
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Volume III of XVIII
*
File Review - Manuel Ray y Rivero
March 30, 1978
December 1960 - January 1961
1. Cable 12/6/60 to Director from Gold J
Ray contacted by Weisinger and made statement that Isle of Pine's
operation failed in his opinion because Bender failed to forward paper
to Havana with key to operation.
2. 12/8/60 Cable to Director from WAVE
Ray advised Wiesinger he is departing for Washington same day to visit
ERNESTA BETANCOURT of OAS and others. In New York on 12/9 to contact
Raul Chibas. Return Miami about 12/11/60.
3. 12/23/60 Cable to Director from Havana indicates Ray wishes return to
Cuba as soon as possible and asks that OLIEN make arrangements through
his official channel. Doesn't want Cubans in WAVE or Cuba to know of
his return.
4. 12/22/60 Information report from U.S. citizen, free-lance writer and
part-time sugar broker (DONALD HOGAN)
Says Miro Cardona has accepted teaching position in Puerto Rico effective
early January 1961. Is disgusted with bickering among anti-Castro Cubans
and will sit on sidelines for time being. Is partivularly opposed to
Ray -- program is too Marxist and Ray is an opportunist.
* 5. 1/16/61 Information Report from U.S. national in a U.S. governemnt
agency. Source had contact with DR. GUILLERMO SALAZAR SANCHEZ, former
Cuban ambassador to Switzerland and DR. SERGIO ROJAS SANTAMARINA, former
Cuban Ambassador to United Kingdom. Salazar said he had heard from a
reliable source that Ray was not a bona fide defector and still acting
on behalf of Castro and is a member of the "Blue Legion". (no further
explanation.)
Dr. Salazar mentioned group called "The Ten Unknowns" who are key figures
in making Communist policy in Latin America. (Ray not implicated as
one of these).
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes 1 - XVIII
April 6, 1978
VOLUME IV - February 1, 1961 March 31, 1961
1. Operation Approval granted for Ray's use as a political asset on
7 February 1961 J
2. Memo to WH/4? Security, From WH/4?CI
Subject: Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo Group
Date: 23 February 1961
Ray pressuring Mr. Droller to have four individuals freed from McAllen
Detention Camp who belong to Gutierrez group. Ray claims they are
members of his group and have been most active against Castro regime
in Cuba. They are as follows: ASENCIO, Suarez, Lazaro
LESNIK, Menendez, Max DPOB 8 Sept 1930,
Vueltas, Las Villas
PORTA Bolanos, Gustavo
REDONDO, Gonzalez, Roger
3.
Cable to Bell, from JMWAVE
Date: March 1, 1961
Artime advises that Ray's group opposed to banning Communist Party and
in favor of "nationalizing everything". Ray favors maintaining trade with
USSR, wants no change in present agrarian reform program.
4.
Cable to JMWAVE from Bell
Date: March 10, 1961
INS is concerned over the increased news coverage of Ray's arrival in
U.S. and activities here. Afraid they will be confronted about Ray's
arrival (which was describad as "black" in another communication) so
JMWAVE asked to re-advise Ray that his story is that on 10 Nov 1960, he
landed somewhere on Keys in a fishing boat, made way to road where picked
up by INS patrol car, taken to WAVE area, examined, declared refugge and
released with admonition to always keep INS advised of his address.
-
* 5. Memo to s Dr. Berle, From: ARA Philip W. Bonsal
Subject: Recent Cuban Developments
Date: March 16, 1961
Conversation with Jose Miro Cardona and Berle, reveals that Cardona has
misgivings about Ray and Pazoz and the MRP. Says Ray is bitterly anti-
American as well as probably totalitarian in his thinking. He no longer
believes Ray has any considerable support inside Cuba. Thinks Ray group
endeavoring to exercise influence in our government so as to be the major
recipient of whatever assistance can be obtained here. He is particularly
$444444 concerned about the role played by Felipe Pazos.
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes 1 - XVIII
April 6, 1978
VOLUME V - April 1961 - July 1961
1. Cable from JMWAVE to Bell
Date: April 3, 1961
FRO
Ray meets with Olien and said he was not as yet prepared to join ene. Said
Miro had welshed on commitments and while willing to accept Ray into CRC,
not willing to give him any voice in the Council. Olein apptempts to
convince Ray he was doing great disservice to Cuban people by refusing to
serve within ERO.
2. Cable to JMWAVE from Bell
Date: April 4, 1961
:
"To test actual MRP capabilities inside request you inform Ray to hit
targets G, I and K during period 5-10 April. Attack target 0 including
diesel locomotive engines immediately. Will forward additional targets if
Ray shows any capability."
3. Letter to Editor (Pencilled note: Propaganda against MRP by Attime's
replacement Jose Manuel Hernandez Puentes received from QD Date 6 Apr 61.)
"I am a Cuban who still thinks that Cuba can be rehabilitated after the fall
of Castro. For this reason many Cubans have been baffled by the list of
names now given as the saviors of Cuba for a Provisional Government. Among
these are such notorious Castro followers as: Ray, Barquin, Pazos, Rufo
Lopez Fresquet, Chibas and others whose names remind us of an era of
mourning, persecution and misery."
4.
Report on Manuel Ray received from Enrique Molinet, a road and airfield
construction engineer under Batista regime. Cover note dated 4/7/61.
Molinet outlines his distaste for Ray, citing at the beginning his refusal
to leave Castro even after the questionable suicide of his brother, Rene.
After Ray was ousted from his Cabinet job, he continued to visit Castro,
occupying a prominent position in all Castro's public appearances. Said
that even before Castro, Ray was an active member of the Cuban Orthodox
Party, highly infiltrated with communists. Claims that when Ray in his
Cabinet position, indoctrinations programs were held expousing communistic
ideals. Also while Minister of Public Works, claims he (Ray) threw out
hundreds of employees without due cause and destroyed every successful
contractor that existed.
* 5. Memorandum for the Record
Subject: Custody of Revolutionary Council, 19-20 April 1961
Signed: Robert F. Moroney
Date: 24 April 1961
Relates that on 19 April 1961, President Kennedy met with the six members of
FRD's Revolutionary Council where President expressed his deep sorrow and
concern over the failure of the military effort (Bay of Pigs). Ray one of the
group.
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes 1 - XVIII
April 6, 1978
VOLUME VI - August 1, 1961 - June 30, 1962
1. Cable to JMWAVE from Director
Date: August 1, 1961
FBI conducting investigation on MRP and Ray and Director indicates he
needs to know purpose of investigation to respond properly.
2. Dispatch from Chief of Base, JMWAVE
Date: August 4, 1961
Subject: Debriefing of Father Bastarrica
Father Bastarrica recently arrived from Cuba as a political exile. At a
luncheon meeting, he reported as follows:
MRP formed in Cuba around 26 July 1960. Organizers were Dr. Amalio Fiallo
Gonzalez, Dr. Antonio Fernandez Nuevo, Reynol Gonzalez, Humberto Perez Herrera.
All these men belonged to group called Accion Democratica. The name of MRP
was suggested by Raul Chibas and in itself it does not constitute a party
or group but rather a coalition of several small groups, which were the
following:
a. The 20 May group, led by Manuel Ray
b. Accion Democratica, led by Dr. Fiallo
c. Accion Verde Olivo, led by Dr. Rufo Lopez Fresquet
d. 30 November Movement, led by David Salvador (never really joined)
e. Chibas' group with Jorge Beruff and Felipe Pazos
f. Dr. Valdez Pino, in asylum in Embassy of Peru and belonged
to Accion Democratica.
Father Bastarrica's opinion of Ray is that he had no way of judging whether
Ray is Communist or Marxist. Lacks quality of leadership because he
does not publically hold to a definite political, social and economic ideology.
He appears to agree with every person he talks to, never arguing with them
or opposing them, all of which shows he has no ideology and makes him a
very dangerous man. Is extremely ambitous for himself, with great desire
for power.
-
3. Memorandum for Chief, WH Division, dated 10 October 1961, from Warren S.
Yauger, Subject: General
Cuban Matters; Specific - Manuel (Monolo) Ray
Planning Board of Puerto Rico announced on 9 October 1961 that Ray has
accepted position as consultant to that Board. Board is an important agency
of Puerto Rican government, attached to the Office of the Governor. Has
broad powers over economic and social planning and is active in exercising
these powers. Ray to receive $12,000 per year. Ray presently in
Venezuela but expected to arrive Puerto Rico within a week.
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files
Volume vi of xviii
Page 2
4. Cable to Director from JMWAVE, dated May 27, 1962 discusses front page
article in Miami Herald of this date by James Buchanan entitled "Miro fades
as Exile Chief: Three Latin Leaders Behing Ray". States that Ray has the
backing of Gov. Monoz Marin, Pres. Romulo Betancourt and former President
Jose Figueras and that Ray has taken over post with blessings of the U.S.
Further states Ray's appointment as "Chief in Exile" came from underground
in Cuba according to Joaquin Godoy, Provisional MRP head in Miami. Article
credits Cubans in Miami with saying "new man in field" is Adolf A. Berle, Jr.
who has been special asst. to State Dept. and is also member of Pres.
Kennedy's special task force on Lantin America. Implication being that
Berle is running new U.S. sponsored Cuban effort.
in local Cuban colony.
Release causing furor
Cable to JMWAVE from Director, 28 May 1962 states State Department spokesman
will state story without foundation at a noon press briefing this date.
5. Listing of principal persons in Puerto Rico with the MRP
RAY, Manuel
PORTELA, J. Migues
PAZOS, Felipe
CARMONA, Claudio
BARQUIN, (Col) Ramon
ESTEVEZ, Jeromino
MELENDEZ, Juan
BERGNUS
GELAVERT
NODAL, Rodolfo
ALVAREZ, Gabriel
PORTELA, Sara
6. On 9 June 1961, Ray transmitts a detailed study of a general program
designed to attain the liberation of Cuba. General Thesis states that
MRP believes that the strongest position for representation and canalization
of aspirations of the large majority of the Cuban people is offered by the
set of ideas and aims of the democratic left.
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - XVIII
April 24, 1978
Volume VII - September 4, 1962 - December 27, 1962
1. Telegram Information Report (circa Sept. 10) Unevaluated information.
Ray in the U.S. 8-9 September. Intends forming new organization. Some of
those participating with Ray in this effort are Felipe Pazos, Raul Chibas,
Ramon Barquin and Justo Carrillo. Ray is of the opinion that nothing
will be done about Cuba in the immediate future as the President of the
United States is fulfilling "an expedient of a political nature." However,
there is an ally in the White House who has assured Ray that if he organizes
a purely revolutionary group, he will be heard.
2. Junta Revolucionaria Cubana
Declaration of Principles outline the following areas:
1. Cuban Reaffirmation - recognition of sovereignty of the people, through suffrag
2.
Human Rights human fraternity and social solidarity for all Cubans
3. Social Justice - equality of opportunity for education, work, homes, etc.
4. Economic Development - intense industrialization
5.
Restoration of Legitimate Property not that under public power
Agrarian Reform Cuban pesantry to own land he cultivates
6.
International Relations
-
break with Soviet bloc
7.
8.
Political Parties
-
Communist Party will be proscribed
-
10.
Elections within 18-month period
2.
9. Political Prisoners immediate release
Dispatch to Chief, Task Force W from Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Date obscured
AMTHRILL-1 provided information on Ray obtained from Silvia KOURI de
Pendas, a fellow student of Ray's at Instituto de Segunda Ensenanza #1 in
Havana. Ray never know to have sympathy for Communist cause. However, one
of his good friends, Pedro Valdes Vivo, is active member of Communist cell
and a brother of Raul Valdes Vivo, now sub-director of Communist paper
"Noticias de Hoy."
3. Cable to Priority San Juan, Info: Priority JMJAVE, Priority Mexico City
From: Director (Rodriguez originator) dated 9 Oct 1962
Admission visa not pauched 00 forwarding document will be in WAVE hands
10 October forpass ing to Ray. Lechuga is principal target in area of
Ray trip. Stress desire keep Lechuga in place in preference to defection.
4. Memorandum for the Record dated 8 October 1962 from Patrick I. Karnley
Subject: Notes on Manolo Ray
In conversation with Luis Laboy, Laboy said Ray does not have any
significant following among Cuban exiles says Ray is honest person
completely motivated by patriotism but lacks qualities of a politician.
Says Ray is too blunt and even Cisneros is not happy with him these days.
Puerto Rican Police are apparently canvassing Cuban exiles regarding Manolo
Ray.In SKIN-1 Report #54 dated 30 Sept 1962, he refere to fact that both he
and Fermin Alvarez Silva were visited by officer of PR Internal Security Force
soliciting their opinions of Ray.
SECRET
1/BR
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Manuel Ray
Volume VIII continued
5.
Excerpt from Bohemia Libre 21 October 1962, page 85 Engineer Ray's
Datest Attitude
-
Letter to magazine from Olga Hernandez, Santurce, PR an exile
who believes Ray really a Communist. Her reasons based on Ray's statements
to "El Mundo" on his arrival in exile that after Castro's defeat there
should be maintenance of cultural and economic relations with Russia,
maintenance of militia, mainenance of confiscated property, socialized
medicine, supervision of national schools and gradual supression of private
schools.
:
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - XVIII
April 24, 1978
Volume IX January 1963 - July 1963
1. Cable to Director from Caracas, dated Feb. 22, 1963.
FRANCISCO SUAREZ QUINONES wishes travel to Maimi to attend JURE rally
24 February. In view Ref B (WAVE 2462) info that Suarez communist and also
MRP member, DCM has asked if any info that Suarez was undercover agent for
MRP or if he may be double agent working for Castro.
2.
Confidential Controlled Dissem. dated 3 June 1963
Title: Plan of Manuel Ray Rivero to Infiltrate the Ranks of the
Central Intelligence Agency
On 30 April 1963, Rogelio Cisneros reported on meeting of JURE exec. board
in his home attended by, among others, Antonio Arias. During meeting,
Cisneros said it was mentioned that Ray had issued orders to infiltrate a
trusted man into the CIA in order to learn details of any plans with regard
to Cuba and if possible infiltrate this man into Cuba. Cisneros also said
JURE planning leaflet drop into Cuba which will include such matters as Ray's
Manifesto against the U.S. Government and against the CIA.
3. Cable to Director from Paris, dated 19 June 1963 #77272
-
Ray in Paris
Ray driven to airport by Alberto
contacted by Jervay.
Baez with whom Ray spent much time and who seems to be closest to Ray
among his contacts in Paris.. Ray in Paris and Brussels for purpose of
turing Franqui and Arcos to agents in place, or defection. Also Cabrera.
Ray convinced Cubans here disillusioned with Castro. Asks for update of
list of personnel and addresses of all Cuban embassies in Europe to be
passed to him in San Juan and UNRUMBLEG6 in Paris. Wants to be trained in
short wave system between himself and UNRUMBLE 6 and station felt these
were good ideas and could be done.
4. Memo for the Record from Alfonso Rodreguez, dated 19 June 1963
Subject: Manolo Ray
Ray's attitude towards CIA feels that the Agency has in the past purposely
and actively attempted to destroy him as a political leader and has proof
of at least one CIA officer plotted with certain MRP officials to remove him
from the Mrp as a condition for CIA assistance to that organization.
Ray cannot be overlooked in the struggle for Cuban freedom. "-- of all the
Cubans I have met, he is the most purposeful, methodical, as well as the most
experienced clandestine operator.."
5. Confidential Controlled Dissem. dated 27 June 1963
Re: Creation of an Intelligence Corps within the JURE
Reliable information from former Rebel Army member (F) active in clandestine
movements. JURE meeting about 30 March 1963 at home of journalist
Antonio Arias said JURE national executive board had created an Intelligence
Corps with JURE whose function was to infiltrate JURE members into various
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Volume IX continued
organizations operating in Miami, as well as into some of the agencies of
the U.S. govt. Said intelligence group would produce great results and
stated as an example the infiltration of the U. S. Army.
6. Dispatch to Chief, Special Affairs Staff from Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Dated July 22, 1963
Subject: Manuel Ray Rivero's Opinion of CIA (AMTAUP-2 source of info)
"During a conversation on an unspecified date, involving AMTAUP-2, Ray and
Rogelio Cisneros Diaz, Ray told Cisneros that they had to be very careful
with CIA agents because they were more dangerous than the Kennedy Administration.
The Kennedy Administration would end but the CIA agents always stayed, and
their memory was longer than the memory of elephants and they never forgot
or forgave. Ray told Cisneros that he feared CIA agents would try to
assassinate him because they were irreconcilable enemies."
SECRET
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Review of Manuel Ray y Rivero Files, Volumes I - XVIII
April 24, 1978
Volume X - August 1963 - September 1963
1. Memorandum for the Record from Alfonso Rodriguez, dta. 2 August 1963
Subject: Meeting with Ray (27 July 1963 in Miami)
Ray to attempt a sabotage operation against the Havana power plant and wants
20lbs high explosives as well as 6-8 thermite grenades. Requested that the
materials be cached inside Cuba (preferably) or in San Juan. Requested that
arrangements be made for Rogelio Cisneros to visit Guatanamo to visit his
brother to inform him of JURE plans -- Rodriguez says possibility remote.
Ray planning to visit Caracas and Costa Rica later if he has a visa from
Mexico. Purpose of trip is fund raising.
2. Cable from JMWAVE to Director #63249 dtd 22 Aug 1963
Ray's Mexican visa forwarded WAVE by safehand Sept 62 and request it
be airmailed to Ray in Puerto Rico. Ray planning trip Costa Rica, Caracas,
Dom. Rep. and Mexico. Departing San Juan 29 August for first leg.
3. Memorandum for the Record dated 23 August 1963, from A. Rodriguez
Subject: Ray, Contact Report
Met with Ray in N.Y.C. on 19 August. Rodriguez recommends to Ted Shackley
that ammunition for JURE be cached near Florida Keys. Thinks it necessary
to help Ray this much in order to measure his capabilities. Ray is having
a 25-foot boat outfitted in Miami area to be operational by about Sept. 10.
Will be used primarily for infiltration and exfiltration of personnel into
Cuba. Ray also says he has been offered a 210 ft. Corvette, flying a
Venezuelan flag and owned by Spaniards friendly to JURE. Said he could extend
operations along the south coast of Cuba for as much as 2 3 weeks with
this vessel. Ray was interested in whether or not KIM flights were to be
resumed into Cuba as he is hopeful of returning by legal means which would
not pose as many difficulties as present Mexican and Spanish air travel
conditions.
-
Ray says he hoped to soon penetrate the Cuban delegation to the U.N.
Said his contact with Ambassador Lechuga, through a woman member of the
JURE, continues, but without significant progress. Lechuga is most
friendly towards her but does not wish to discuss any of his problems with
her.
Rodriquez recommends continuation of monthly $10,000 payments to Jure and
an additional $15,000 to cover cost of vessels to be acquired.-- total of
$25,000 monthly for 6 months.
4. Cable to Director from JMWAVE, dated 24 August 1953 1232228z
Ray Mexican visa waiver number 50844 issued 3 Sept 62 valid for six months,
hence now expired. Under circumstances, WAVE not mailing to Ray unless
otherwise instructed.
5.
Cable to JMAVE from Director, dtd 24 Aug 63
air mail as Ray will need to procure new waiver.
SECRET
Cite Dir. 63774 Please
SECRET
Betsy Palmer
Volume X continued
6.
Cable to San Jose, Caracas, Santo Domingo, Mexico Cityk JMWAVE
From: Director dated 31 August 63
Ray departing 29 Aug. on trip to first three addees. Attempting renew
Mexican visa waiver for travel there later. Purpose of trip to solicit
political backing, raise funds, tighten JURE organization, streamline
communication and establish take-off points for operations against target.
7. Cable to Director from JMWAVE dtd 7 Sept 63, Ref WAVE 3895
Reported conversation with Ray's sister-in-law wherein she stated Ray
visited her home on 30 August to say goodby. He was going to be infiltrated
into Cuba and would not see her for some time. Said he was not in accord
with certain U.S. officials on Cuban policy and has no confidence in U.S.
ability to liberate Cuba. Said he had refused two invitations extended
by RFK to discuss Cuban situation.
8. Document transfer and Cross Reference dtd 10 Sept 63 UFG-03590
Ray arrived secretly in Miami from Puerto Rico, had secret meeting with
Manuel Quiza Docal, LDR of Cubanos Libres, in which Quiza officially
connected his organization to JURE for all action. Later traveled to
N.Y.C. to purchase c-4 explosives.
9. Cable to Director from JMWAVE dtd 11 Sept 63, report from AMTAUP-2
who spoke with Rogelio Cisneros on 6 Sept. Cisneros stated Ray departed
for Costa Rica on 5 Sept to interview President Orlich. Said on Ray's
last meeting with RFD, the private secretary of President Romulo Betancourt
was present. Cisneros said JURE objective is to have different prominent
