198-10009-10098
2025 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10009-10098
RECORD SERIES:
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
ARMY
FROM:
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
TO:
MULTIPLE
TITLE:
ICCCA: REPORT ON STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF ACTIONS DESIGNED TO COUNTER
SUBVERSION
DATE:
PAGES:
11/26/1963
19
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
ICCCA - SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
CUBAN SUBVERSION
RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL TO AND FROM CUBA
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
IB
Redact
05/15/1998
Califano Papers, Box 2, Folder 25. Memo from Califano to Wheeler, Sloan, Alger, Wendt, Carpenter,
Quilter re: attached paper concerning status of implementation of actions designed to counter Cuban
subversion.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 1
JFK Review
Department of the Army EO 13526
Declassify Exclude Exempt
Authority
Refer
Review Date 5/19/2415 By Kar
21
SECRET
26 NOV 1963
MEMORANDUM NO. 81 FOR GENERAL EARLE G. WHEELER (JCS)
SUBJECT:
Reference:
MR. FRANK K. SLOAN, Dep Asst Soc/Def ISA
(Regional Affaire)
MAJOR GENERAL J. D. ALGER, USA
REAR ADMIRAL W. F. A. WENDT, USN
MAJOR GENERAL J. W. CARPENTER, HI, USAF
BRIGADIER GENERAL C. J. QUILTER
USMC
Interdepartmental Coordinating Coramittee of Cuban Affairs:
Report on Status of Implementation of Actions Designed to
Counter Subversion (U)
DA Memo 464, subject as above, dated September 19, 1963
Attached herewith is a final draft of the Report to the President of
the Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion on Progress Made During September
1963 in Gurbing Cuban Subversion in Latin America
It is requested that commeate, if any, be provided this office by
1200 hours, 2 December 1963. The Department of Defense portion of
subject report is based on submissions provided in response to referenced
memorandu.
Enclosure
As Stated
cc:
Mr. Yarmolinsky (OSD)
Signed
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
General Counsel
Lt Col Haig
Mr. Califano
ASG
OSA, ASC Control No.2074 SECRET
ww
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 2
DRAFT
11/13/63
REPORT OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE
on CUDAN SUBVERSION
ACTION TAKEN DURING SEPTEMBER 1963 IN CURBING
CURAN SUBVERSION IN LATIN AMERICA
OSA, ASC, Control No. 2707H
32424708 Page (3
SECRET
SECRET
DRAFT
11/13/63
Control of Travel to and From Cuba
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Tunis to call to the attention
of the Foreign Ministry our concern at increased evidence
:
of Aeroflot attempts to establish North Africa routes to
Cuba, especially through Algeria, and our conviction that
Tunisia has a valid case in thwarting any Bloc civil air
penetration of Africa.
b.
Instructed Embassy Conakry to contact Guinean Covern-
ment officials, reminding them of their past assurances
that no Aeroflot flights to Cuba would be permitted to
use Conakry facilities, and to express our concern at
recent indications that Aeroflot was preparing to establish
service to Cuba via Conakry.
Instructed Consulate Fort au France to investigate
and report on alleged landing and refuelling of Cubana
aircraft at Guadeloupe. Also double-checked directly
with the Shell Company, the supplier of the fuel.
Instructed Embassy Paris to query the French Goverment
about alleged Cubana use of the Guadeloupe facility, and
to express our concern at this evidence of Cuba's attempt
to use French Caribbean dependencies for flights to and
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 4
SECRET
From
SECRET
- 2 -
from Latin America.
d.
Instructed Embassy Rio to make a new approach to
the Brazilian Foreign Ministry to express our concern
at Cuba's continuing use of "charter" flights to Brazil
and the laxity of Brazilian officials in the control of
passengers. During the course of the month the Brazilian
Government began tightening controls against Cubana
flights. Specifically, all requests for landing permission
were henceforth to be processed by the Foreign Office,
with appropriate delays. Also tighter passenger, crew
and cargo controls were to be instituted when a Cubans
flight is permitted to use Brazilian facilities.
Determined that the U.K. had specifically warned
Cubena that no aviation fuel was available in Barbados and
that H.M.G. would, in the future, respect Shell Company's
decision to deny fueling to Cubana planes.
Continued inter-Departmental efforts to prevent
resumption of ferry service between Cuba and the U.S.
which a British citizen, Harold Derber, has been attempt-
ing to establish during the past several month.
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 5
SECRET
SECRET
- 3 -
g. Instructed Consul Georgetown to investigate and
report on evidence the Department received which indicates
that Cuba is planning to sell merchant vessels to British
Guiana in order to facilitate the establishment of
regular service for passengers and cargo.
Central Intelligence Agency
a. In connection with the Seventh Congress of the
International Union (UIA) held in Habana September 29 -
October 3, 1963 the Buenos Aires Station:
(1) encouraged the Argentine National Federation
of Architects to oppose Argentine attendance at the
Habana meeting, with the result that 25 of the 39
practicing architects who had planned to attend can-
celled their participation;
(2) arranged to prevent the attendance of any
officially authorized Argentine delegation at the Habana
meeting, but encouraged the attendance of an official
Argentine delegation of anti-Communist coloration at en
international architecta mecting to be held in Mexico
ià October;
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 6
(3)
SECRET
- 8 -
(3) delivered a memorandua to the Minister of
Interior concerning Cuban charter flights to Brazil which
supported the Ambassador's request that the Argentine
government express concern over such flights.
b. Rio de Janeiro Station continued to furnish
the Embassy with data on Cubana flights to Brazil used
In representations to the Brazilian Foreign Office.
Also induced Rio airport officials to impose stringent
*
passport control and baggage efforts. These efforts
:
น
contributed to the Brazilian Covernment's failing to
issue landing permits for Cubana flights on September
21, 24 and 25, 1963 forcing their cancellation. When
Qubang, because of harassment at Rio, began using the
landing facilities in Sao Paulo where controls were
non existent, CIA initiated and obtained a local liaison
agreement for similar harassment in the event of future
Cubans flights to Sao Paulo.
c. Mexico City station inspired a press campaign
of hoof and mouth and smallpox epidemics in Cuba, prior
to the Architects Congress to discourage participation
in the Habana meeting. The resulting quarantines and
SEGRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 7
innoculations
SECRET
- 5 -
Innoculations were a factor in discouraging 52 of the
60 Mexican professional architects who were expected to
go to Habana from attending the Congress.
II. Control of Novement of Propaganda
Measures to contact.
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 8
- 6 -
III. Control of Clandestine Movement of Guerrillas
and arm
Department of State
Made the necessary arrangements through Embassy
Tegucigalpa with the Coveriment of Honduras for the
dispatch of three U.3. helicopters to give logistical
assistance to the Honduran Army in its effort to locate
and eliminate the band of guerrillas allegedly operating
in the Fatuca River area along the Honduran-Nicaraguan
border.
Department of Defense
Three Off-13 helicopters from USSOUTHCOM supported
:
Honduran arued forces conducting counter-insurgency
operations in the Patuca River area. A total of 27 sorties
were flown resulting in delivery of 3928 pounds of supplies,
evacuation of 12 sick Hoadoran soldiers, airlift of 19
passengers to points in the operational area, and
recovery of 400 pounds of supplies from the operational
arca.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 9
SECRET
IV
SECRET
- 7 -
IV. Control of Transfer of Funds
Department of State
a. Instructed Embassy Mexico City to inform the
Mexican airline SAESA that their proposal to purchase
surplus Cuban aircraft would in fact result in the
1
accrual to Cuba of a significant amount of hard currency,
and the U.S. would have to oppose the transaction.
Further, if dollars were involved in the purchase,
it would be a violation of the Cuban Assets Control
Regulations.
b. Informed Department of Treasury, Foreign Assets
Centrol Office, of the activities of Sowondelp Enterprises,
a Miami firm engaged in sending remittances to persons
in Cabs in violation of the Cuban Assets Control
Regulations.
c. Instructed Consulate, Belize to inform
Mr. Richard Joyce, an American national, that his
commercial transactions with Cuba were in violation
of the Cuban Assets Control Regulations and that he
• is prohibited from engaging in such trade.
SECRET
NW 50955. DocId: 32424708 Page 10
SECRET
- 8 -
V. Strengthening of Counter-Insurgency Capabilities
Department of Defense
a. Thirteen Latin American officers graduated from
:
the counter-insurgency Operations Course of the U.S.
Army School for Latin America in the Panama Canal Zone
on 20 September. During the month, a total of 91 Latin
American officers enrolled in courses stressing counter-
insurgency at the Army Canal Zone school.
b. Eight U.S. Army counter-insurgency mobile
training teams were providing training to the Armed
Forces of five Latin Americon countries during the period.
U.S. Air Force counter-insurgency training teams were
in two camtries.
c. In the Canal Zone, 15 students from five countries
vere under instruction in the operation of coast guard
utility patrol craft used for coastal surveillance.
Six students from two countries were undergoing similar
training in the United States
d. A U.S. Navy counter-insurgency training team
is in Venezuela to assist in improving the security
of oil installations in Lake Maracaibo,
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 11
SECRET
- 9 -
e. Costa Rica and Honduras were provided one
Ceesaa 185 aircraft each for medical civic action and
internal security purposes.
f. On May 25, 1953, three M-43B KAMAN helicopters
were provided to the government of Colombia on a 90-day
loan. The Colombian Government requested an extension
of the loan and a 90-day extension has been approved.
Central Intelligence Agency
a.
City Station has recruited, on a
trial basis, a former member of the 13 November guerrilla
group and debriefings are in process. Negotiations
continue with the Government of Guatemala for the
formation of a new internal security service.
b. Lima Station has agreed to furnish the Peruvian
Investigations Police (PIP) with an outboard motor
to increase their patrol capability on rivers crossing
the Bolivian frontier. Our information is that the
rivers crossing this frontier have provided the primery
avenues for recent attempts to gain clandestine entry
of personnel and weapons into Peru.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 12
VI.
SECRET
- 10 -
VI. Exchange of Intelligence on Cuban Subversion
Department of Defense
Engineering installation work continued on radio
stations for Managua, Nicaragua and Tegucigalpa,
Honduras. No further progress has been made in reaching
agreements with Colombia and Ecuador for rights to
establish radio stations in those countries. Installation
of the new trans-istimian comercial cable in Panams
is nearing completion.
Central Intelligence Agency
CIA Stations continued their exchange of intelligence
:
information with local intelligence Agencies. The
folloving actions are of special significance:
a. The CIA Station in Buenos Aires furnished the
Argentine State Intelligence Service (SIDE) with
information on the travel of Argentines to Cuba, and re-
quested that SIDE provide name traces and debrief these
travellers on their retura whenever feasible. SIDE
provided the traces, but did not conduct any debriefings.
The Station has not felt it feasible to try to remedy
this oaission in view of the personnel changes expected
within SIDE after the new goverment is installed on
NW 50955 DocId: 324200torage 13
SECRET
2.
SECRET
- 11 -
b. As a result of information passed by the Bogota
Station to the Administrative Department of Security
(DAS) concerning Colombien travellers to Cuba, a number
of passport violations have been discovered in which
travellers to Cuba are using passports issued to other
persons. There is a reluctance, however, on the part
of the Colombian Goverment to prosecute this type
of violation.
:
な
c. At the urging of the CIA Station in Lime, the
National Intelligence Service (SIN) instructed one of
its penetrations of leftist groups to campaign for a trif
to Cuba in order to receivo querrilla warfare training.
This asset has been offered, and has accepted, an opportunity
to make the trip by the Leftist Revolutionary Movencht
(MIR), prisazy vahiele of Cuban subversive activities
in Peru. Briefing and debriefing of the asset will be
done by the SIN.
The Feruvian Naval Intelligence Service (PHIS) has,
in response to the efforts of the Station in Lima, sent
one of its agents to Chile where he will sign aboard a
Chilean freighter calling at Habana. The asset has been
given specific intelligence requirements to fulfill.
The
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 14
SECRET
SECRET
- 12 -
The Prime Minister and Minister of Government and
Police has requested from the CIA representative in
Lima any information that he might supply on subversive
elements posing a threat to the Government of Peru.
This request has opened an additional channel to the
highest level of the Government with a concomitent
prospectior effective action when needed.
:
d. Through reguler lisisoca channels, the Venezuelan
General Directorate of Police (DIGEFOL) has been provided
by CIA with the names of all Venezuelans known to have
travelled to Cuba from February through August 1963.
This activity will be carried out on a continuing basis;
the names are now being integrated into the regular
watch list kept at international airports in Venezuela.
Thus far, at least three returnees have been arrested
on the basis of the information supplied to DIGEPOL,
DICEPOL has indicated its appreciation of the data
being supplied and desires that the arrangement be
continued.
VII. Survettience of Cuban Diplomatic, Comercial and Cultural
Ho special actions to report,
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 15
VIL.
SECRET
- 13 -
VIII. Other Special Actions
United States Information Areney
a. The Agency's press service transmitted seven
articles relating to Cuban subversion on its wireless
file service to USIS offices throughout Latin America
for placement in the local newspapers. Developments
reported in these articles included demands by the Bolivian
Senate for the ouster of the Cuban Chargé d'Affaires,
terrorisa and government counteraction in Venezuela,
the seizure in Ecuador of an arms and explosives cache
reportedly received from Cuba, several articles on the
International Union of Architects Congress in Habana
(emphasizing the intent of the Castro regime to use the
Congress as a forum for its propaganda claims), and
Assistant Secretary Martin's Los Angeles speech in which
he pointed out the regime's affinity for Chinese communist
doctrine and its continued emphasis on violent revolution
and subversion. In all, the press service transmitted
27 articles and comentaries during September on the
subject of Cubs, the other articles dealing for the most
part with economie and political conditions inside the
country as evidenced by the regime's own admissions and
the reports of refugees.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 16:
SECRET
3
SECRET
- 14 -
B. The Voice of America Spanish broadcasts to Latin
America during September carried a total of 20 news
analyses, commentaries, press round-ups, and interviews
related to the subject of Cuban subversion. Some of
the developpents treated included the following:
A commentary on commist onbassies as channels for
subversion; a news analysis on the U.S. students who
visited Cuba; Assistant Secretary Martin's Los Angeles
speech, a neve analysés on Cuban subversion as an obstacle
in the normalization of U.5.-Soviet relations; a three-
part series on university autonomy in Latin America;
a festure on the letter of a Colombian student who
went to Cuba on a scholarship and was disillusioned by
the communist indoctrination; a commentary on Che Guevara's
recent article on revolutionary strategy; and a comentary
on guerrilla training in Guba. Many of these items were
repeated several tines in the broadcasts. The "Rendezvous
with Cuba" hour carried four or five commentaries sim
Kabla and interviews nightly on economic and political
developmente inside Cuba. Of special note, the Cuban
radio and Castro himself reseted angrily to Voice of
Amorica broadcasts about Che Guevara's article and to con-
:
mentaries that Cuba had accepted an agricultural role in
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 17
SECRET
the
SECRET
- 15 -
the commist bloc and had postponed its plans to
industrialize.
c. On September 27, the Agency issued a circular
Instruction to alllits Latin American posts urging
greater attention to opportunities for publicizing Cuban-
stizulated subversion, cuggesting the various types of
information activities to support this effort, and requesting
monthly reports of field actions taken to implement the
Instruction. This was done as a follow-up to the original
instruction on Cuben subversion which was issued April 3,
1963.
Central Intelligence Agency
a CLA in Brazilcassisted in the defection and
exploitation of a Cuban athelete Roberto Perez Ondarse
in Porto Alegre on 4 September 1963. Perez was a member
of the Cuban basket-bell team which participated in the
World University Games (FISU) held in Forto Alegre
Brazil in early September 1963.
b. Assistance was given to the Coverment of
Cantemala in the interrogation of some of those vio
were arrested in comection with the Communist Party
documents shot were confiscated in late May 1963.
SUCRET
Only
HW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 18
SECRET
- 16 -
Only one of those interrogated admitted to any involvement
with the captured documents, the Communist Party,
querrilles, or angthing else that could be construed
as incriminating. The one who did aduit knowledge
denied that he was involved in any way. The Goverment
of Guatemala wants to interrogate this person again at
a later date.
c. CIA Station in Montevideo arranged for an
interview between an Uruguayan military intelligence
officer and a recent defector from the Montevideo
Cuban Embassy during which extensive information regarding
Cuben subversive activities was revealed. The Uruguayan
officer prepared a report containing this data and
presented it to the National Council of Government which
has been slow to indicate concern over communist sub-
versive activity in Uruguay. As a result of this report,
the NCG bas directed the Minister of Interior to appoint
a special commission to study the problem of Commnist
subversion and to make recommendations as to what course
of action should be taken by the Uruguayan Covernment..
Should the Government wish to preas for passage of
stronger
NW 50955 DocId:32424708 Page 19
SECRET
- 17 -
stronger anti-subversive legislation the Station has taken
steps to prepare Uruguyan public opinion by planning
simultaneous local press releases of the salient
features of the defector report with similar press
reporting in the United States where the defector willbe
brought to light.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424708 Page 20