1000000
104-10338-10020
!
τ
f
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET/NOFORN
TO:
Special Group (CI) Assistants
FROM:
Paul Eckel
File-CI
23 March 1965
SUBJECT: Study entitled "The Havana CP Conference of November 1964"
(CIA - 319/00004-65)
Please correct a typographical error on page 7 of subject
study which was sent to you on 19 March 1965. The error is
found in the seventh line from the bottom of the page, which when
corrected should read, "...with the ouster of Anibal Escalante
in early 1962, and--outside..."
Correction
made in
study
Sned) PAUL E ECKEL
Paul E. Eckel
Special Group Officer
13-00000.
1
1
SECRETFORN
The Special Group (CI) Assistants
19 March 1965
Paul Eckel
The Havana Conference of Communist Parties, November 1964
There is enclosed for your information and use a CIA
Working Paper analyzing and commenting upon subject conference.
I think you will find the contents of this document pertinent and
timely particularly Section III dealing with conference decisions.
The dissemination of this document seems particularly
appropriate at this time in view of the discussion at the Group's
18 March meeting concerning USIA's efforts to publicize communist
support for and participation in subversive operations. Use of this
material is governed by the stipulations contained on the inside
cover page in the paragraph entitled, "Limitations."
Paul E. Eckel
Special Group Officer
13-00000
1
1
SPRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM/BACKGROUND USE ONLY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
CIA-319/00004-65
WORKING PAPER
The Havana CP Conference of November 1964
3 March 1965
This is not an officially approved publication of CIA. It is circulated
for information subject to the enclosed statement of limitations.
S-E-C-R-E-T-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM/BACKGROUND USE ONLY
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000
1
SCOPE
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM/BACKGROUND USE ONLY
CIA-319/00004-65
The Havana CP Conference of November 1964, 36 pages,
dated 3 March 1965, describes the background, purposes, and
circumstances of the Conference of Latin American Communist
Parties held in Havana 22-29 November 1964, and discusses
the issues involved and the decisions taken. It also identifies
the programs and courses of action decided upon at the confer-
ence, certain of which have already been placed in operation,
and discusses the tactics to be used in carrying them out.
LIMITATIONS
There are a number of instances in this paper in which
the language employed has been adopted for the specific
purpose of source protection. It is essential, therefore,
that any proposed use of the paper or of material drawn from
it be cleared in advance with the originator. The circulation
of the paper should be kept on a strict need-to-know basis.
Hence, any questions with respect to the use of this document
or the material therein in a manner contrary to the dissem-
ination controls must be addressed to the Document Division,
OCR.
S-EC-R-E-T
NO FOREIGN DISSEM/BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
THE HAVANA CP CONFERENCE OF NOVEMBER 1964
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Summary
I. Background, Genesis, and Circumstances of the
Page
1
Conference
A. The Precedents
6
6
B. Problems Requiring Coordinated Solutions
7
1. The Brazilian Party Protest
8
2. The Argentine Party Protest
8
3. The Peruvian Party Protest
9
4. The Bolivian Party Protest
10
C. The Havana Conference--an Expression of
Loyalty to Moscow
10
D. The Conference Convenes
11
III. The Conference Decisions
13
A. The Regional "Solidarity" Projects for 1965
13
B. First Organizational Moves in the Solidarity
15
Campaigns
C. The Conference Treatment of the Role of,
and Support for, Armed Struggle
21
1. The Soviet Commitment
21
i
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
13-00000
1
1
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
Page
C. (continued)
2. Post-Conference Developments in the
25
Field of Violence
a. Guatemala
b. Honduras
c. Panama
d. Venezuela
25
25
26
27
IV. The Conference and International Communist Unity
A. Cuba, the Orthodox CP's, and the Other
29
29
Liberation Elements
B. The National CP's and Internal Factionalism
31
V. Conclusions
33
Appendix
ii
-SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
35
13-00000
1
1
t
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
THE HAVANA CP CONFERENCE OF NOVEMBER 1964
I. Summary.
The 22-29 November conference in Havana was the first
publicly acknowledged regional congress of Latin American CP's
since 1929, although it has been the practice since at least 1956
to hold such conferences regularly, if secretly, in Moscow. As
with other such conferences, it was called to coordinate regional
Communist activity with Soviet policy, and represents an effort
by the Soviets to establish orthodox CP control and coordination
over the revolutionary tactics to be employed in each country and
to prevent unilateral support by Cuba to extremist groups of its
own choosing.
Problems resulting from Soviet-Cuban differences over
the conduct of subversive operations in Latin America emerged
again after the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962, and were
intensified by the failure of the USSR and the Latin American
CP's to give Castro the support he desired. During 1963 Soviet
pressure on Castro and complaints by various CP's over Cuban
"interference" in the revolution in their respective countries
resulted in a number of discussions which, in turn, set the stage
for the Havana conference. The careful coordination between
Moscow and Havana and the publicity given by Moscow to the
final conference communique testify to the importance given by
the Soviets to this display of unity. The endorsement of the
. Moscow declarations of 1957 and 1960 can be interpreted by the
CPSU as a declaration of loyalty to Moscow by the Latin American
parties, including--for the first time--the new PURS of Cuba.
The unwritten but_basic premise of the communique lies
in an agreement by Castro to limit Cuban support to those
revolutionary groups approved by the CP of the country concerned
and, conversely, a pledge by the Soviet Bloc to support armed
action in countries where such action is approved by the local CP.
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKEROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
-SEGRETINO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
Soviet and Cuban statements, and covert intelligence sources,
suggest that the Venezuelan, Guatemalan, and perhaps Colombian
revolutionary forces may be the chief beneficiaries of this
support, although the communique itself promises "active aid"
to "freedom fighters" in other countries as well.
Preparations for the conference were made in Moscow
in early November by various leaders and representatives of
Latin American parties. The meeting was then held in Havana,
attended by a Soviet observer, and subsequently a group returned
to Moscow where they worked out the final editing of the documents
approved in Havana. Before the communique was issued, a
delegation of some ten Latin American leaders traveled to China
in an unsuccessful attempt to gain Chinese cooperation with the
conference agreements.
The overt conference decisions, as revaled in the
communique, involve four region-wide solidarity projects:
solidarity with Cuba; solidarity with all Latin American anti-
imperialist struggles; solidarity for the release of political
prisoners; and solidarity in support of the "combative" struggle
of the Venezuelan people. Implementation of these campaigns
began promptly with the scheduling of a Cuban solidarity congress in
Montevideo in April and the initiation of an amnesty drive and
other international campaigns. The Montevideo meeting will
probably represent a major effort--comparable to the Mexico
City liberation congress of March 1961--to demonstrate orthodox
Communist willingness and capabilities to support Cuba.
Argentine and Chilean parties have already met to pledge their
utmost efforts to assure the success of the conference.
With respect to the general anti-imperialist campaign,
the communique stresses the need for organization on a
permanent basis to give "active" (but unspecified) aid to freedom
fighters in some countries, to "intensify solidarity" with the
people of Panama, and to give "resolute" aid to independence
struggles in Puerto Rico and European dependencies. The
wording suggests that some regional coordinating body may be
:
-2-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND DSE OMLY
13-00000
1
*SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
formed. Both Che Guevara of Cuba and Salvador Allende of
Chile have suggested some such coordination, and there is
some evidence that sub-regional efforts have already begun.
The call for solidarity with Venezuela is not new. In
1963 the Cuban Institute of Friendship with Peoples (ICAP)
made such a call, and a special effort to promote solidarity
was made shortly before the unsuccessful FALN effort to
disrupt the Venezuelan presidential elections. The attention
given to Venezuela in the conferencecommunique is significant,
however, as it commits the Latin American CP's to support
a liberation movement in which the main line has been the
armed struggle. As failure of this line in Venezuela would
undermine the line elsewhere, it is possible that the initiative
was as much Cuban as Venezuelan. In any event, the Cubans
began devoting increased attention to Venezuelan solidarity
shortly before the conference and organized a Cuban-Venezuelan
solidarity week during which an FALN office was opened in
Havana. There is some evidence that the CP's in other
countries are beginning to organize in support of Venezuela.
Behind the language of the conference communique lies
an explicit though secret Soviet commitment to support the
armed struggle in Latin America. A CPSU functionary has
recently stated, in a closed meeting with non-Bloc Communists,
that armed struggle is "likely to be necessary in some
situations in Latin America," and a Pravda editorial clearly
spells out the Soviet obligation to support the just struggle of
armed patriots in Venezuela, Guatemala, and " a number of
..other countries." However, the Soviets apparently look to the
local CP's to protect them from over-commitment and involve -
ment in rash adventurism, and only in the case of parties which
have clearly committed themselves to the support of specific
revolutionary groups does there seem to be an obligation on
the part of the Soviets. This is the case with Venezuela, where
the CP has clearly identified itself with the policies and
objectives of the FALN. It is less clear in Guatemala, where
the CP recognizes the FAR (a nominal unified guerrilla command)
-3-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
13-00000
-SEGRETINO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
but admits only a "certain degree of maturity" of conditions
for revolution. In Colombia, the CP admits conditions are
"mature," but admits that unity of action does not exist. In
other countries, theoretical considerations may also qualify
Soviet support.
The Soviet obligation to honor its commitment to aid
an armed struggle may also be limited by unwillingness of
Castro and pro-Castro groups to collaborate with the local
CP's. In Guatemala, despite CP approval of the FAR,
difficulty has existed between the CP and extremists in the
13th of November Movement which may delay the realization
of the unity sought.
Despite the theoretical considerations which may limit
Soviet support, there have been significant signs of stepped-up
plans for sabotage, terrorism, and guerrilla activity in several
Central American countries, under the direction of the local
Communist party. In Guatemala, the party has formed a
committee to consolidate information on professional men,
landowners, and military officials who should be "liquidated"
in 1965. In Honduras, Cuban-trained leaders of the Francisco
Morazon Liberation Movement have agreed to submit to CP
direction, and the CP military command has planned militant
action for the post-election period. In El Salvador, the military
command of the FUAR has been reactivated, and the CP Panama
presented its military plan to Raul Castro at the time of the
conference, asking for Cuban training and arms at the same
time. In Venezuela also, there have been some developments
of significance: the chief of the FALN, at the time of the
conference, obtained promises of financial aid from Cuba and
promises of arms from the Bloc; subsequently, he traveled to
the USSR to seek additional support for the revolution.
Reportedly, Cuban leaders agreed to give support only to
those revolutionary groups approved by the local Communist
party. If Castro abides by this agreement, it would resolve
the complaints by various CP's over unilateral Cuban action
and strengthen the hand of mature, orthodox, Communists
over the young extremists. However, the record suggests
-4-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND DSE ONLY
13-00000
1
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY.
that in 1963 and 1964 Castro responded only nominally to Soviet
pressure, and this may be the case now, despite some evidence
of Cuban sincerity. Without Chinese endorsement, which the
Latin American CP's fruitlessly tried to enlist in December, the
Havana agreement may not promote effective unity or bring about
the cessation of of polemics and elimination of factionalism for
which it calls.
The Latin American parties, however, appear happy
with the communique so far: the Uruguayan leaders see it as
softening the differences between hard-line and soft-line
elements; the Bolivian first secretary feels that it will reduce
the influence of the anti-party (pro-Chinese) faction; and a
Brazilian, CP functionary in Prague spoke of the virtues of
such efforts toward unity and complete understanding in the
socialist camp, though without commenting on the disunity
which exists in Brazil.
In conclusion, events in December and January indicate
that efforts have been made to carry out the decisions of the
Havana Conference, and these efforts may contribute to giving
greater unity, common purpose, and momentum to Communist
subversive activity throughout the region. But it is equally
obvious that, if the CPSU seeks greater unity among its
adherents, and if there is a renewal of the confrontation with
the Chinese in the wake of Moscow's 1 March CP meeting, the
Havana agreements may be subject to serious strain. The pro-
Chinese Albanians have charged that the Havana meeting was a
Soviet-inspired maneuver to trap the Cuban Communists and to
restore Soviet control over Communism in the area. They
demand that the CPSU not be given respite nor allowed to
consolidate its "shaky position."
The orthodox Latin American CP's face a series of
tests, both regional and national. Unimpressive showings in
the various solidarity campaigns may easily lead to increased
antagonism and recriminations. In Venezuela, the party must
defend the FALN against increasingly effective government
action and also regain political influence. In Cuba, in particular,
the old-line Communists face Fidel Castro's efforts to resist
Soviet orthodoxy through his influence over the development of
the PURS. Every failure in these tests will put new strains on
the Havana agreements.
-5-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
1
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
II. Background, Genesis, and Circumstances of the Conference.
A. The Precedents.
The 22-29 November conference in Havana was the first
publicly acknowledged regional congress of Latin American CP's
since 1929. However, it in fact has been the practice since at
least 1956 to hold such conferences regularly, if secretly, in
Moscow. They usually have followed major world CP conferences
and are used for discussing, planning, and coordinating actions
to be taken in carrying out the Soviet line endorsed at the world
meeting concerned. Thus, following the 20th CPSU Congress in
February 1956, a secret meeting of Latin American CP's was
held to plan regional and sub-regional coordination. After the
40th Anniversary celebration in November 1957, a Latin American
CP conference was held, under Soviet guidance, to organize a
long-term action program to begin in 1958, a program which
included coordinated support for the anti-dictatorial struggles
in Venezuela and Cuba, improved sub-regional coordination, and
hemispheric consolidation of anti-US action and propaganda.
This program was implemented through support to the Cuban
26th of July Movement, through a conference of northern Latin
American CP's in Mexico in March 1958, and a hemispheric
peace conference in Buenos Aires in May 1958. These, in turn,
allowed coordination at lower levels.
Following the 21st CPSU Congress in January 1959, a
similar secret Latin American Conference was held, again with
a Soviet "observer" present. Emphasis was put on a continuation
of the 1958 action program and on more effective concealment of
the Communist initiative and influence in the organization of
popular movements.
After the 81-party conference in Moscow in November
1960, another secret LA CP conference was held, at which time
emphasis was placed on support of Cuba against US-sponsored
invasion threats and on the regional development of the national
liberation movement after the Cuban model. Implementation of
-6-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACRSRUCE C
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKERSONO USE ONLY
these objectives was furthered through the "national liberation'"
conference in Mexico (March 1961) and through a secret meeting
of Latin American CP leaders in Havana (May 1961), at which the
role of Cuba as the primary external training and coordinating
base for subversion was established. From this came further
sub-regional planning, such as the August 1961 conference of
Central American CP's to discuss the armed struggle. Paralleling
the coordinated CP action, there was a similar regional
coordination of the Cuban-supported Castroist revolutionary
movements.
B. Problems Requiring Coordinated Solutions.
Russo-Cuban conduct of Communist subversive operations
in Latin America since 1959 has been marked by disputes and
mutual concessions relating to the role of Cuba and Cuban
revolutionary tactics. Initial differences between Castro and the
Communists were apparently reconciled in late 1960, and as
Castro subsequently dedicated himself to intensive study of
Marxism-Leninism, the Soviets and the orthodox parties permitted
Cuban-oriented national liberation movements to assume leader-
ship in the revolutionary struggle. The WPC-organized national
liberation conference in Mexico in March 1961 symbolized this
collaboration, and during 1961 a number of guerrilla liberation
fronts were founded in various countries. In December of the
same year, Castro announced that he had become a "mature"
Marxist-Leninist. However, the failure of the Soviets and the
various Latin American CP's to defend Cuban sovereignty
effectively during the October 1962 missile crisis created a
grave breach. Castro initiated the purge of "old Communists"
with the ouster of Anibal Escalante in early 1962 and--outside
of Cuba--the orthodox CP's began to criticize Cuban "interference"
in the conduct of the liberation struggle. These conflicts figured
in a number of meetings in Moscow, Havana, Prague, and else-
where during 1963, and the Havana Conference may be viewed as
an attempt to show that a new basis for unity and coordination has
been achieved.
-7-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SEGRETINO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
1. The Brazilian Party Protest.
In February 1963, Luiz Carlos Prestes, Secretary
General of the Brazilian Communist Party (PCB), left for
Moscow and then Havana, to correct what he and other PCB
leaders considered to be affronts to the PCB by both the
Cubans and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). The main
complaint was that the Chinese and Cubans had often by-passed
the PCB and had dealt with revolutionary groups in Brazil,
particularly the dissident Communist Party of Brazil (CPB)
and the Peasant Leagues of Francisco Juliao. Although while
in Cuba Prestes declared his party's adherence to the Second
Declaration of Havana and to the armed struggle line for
Latin America, he insisted that the time was not propitious
for violence or terrorism in Brazil, and apparently indicated
that he had approval of his position from Moscow. Prestes
was able to resolve some of the conflicts existing between
Cuba and the PCB, but several major differences remained
outstanding. Castro and other Cuban leaders refused to
entertain Prestes' protest against their giving aid to Juliao,
on the specious grounds that the question of PCB-Juliao
differences was an internal question of the Brazilian movement
on which it would not be proper for them to express an opinion.
Prestes, who interpreted this as proof of the Cuban intent to
continue support of Juliao, concluded that Cuban leaders were
committed to the view that the best way in which Communist
movements in Latin American countries could aid Cuba was
to launch their own national revolution promptly.
.2. The Argentine Party Protest.
:
In March/April 1963, an official of the Communist
Party of Bolivia (PCB) visited Argentina, and, on instructions
from the CPSU, told PCA leaders that Cuba was preparing to
organise and support insurrectionary groups in Bolivia,
Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela with the cooperation of the
PCB. On hearing the report, the Communist Party of
Argentina (PCA) sent the head of its international section to
-8-
SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND BGE ONLY
Bolivia and Peru to argue that revolutionary planning such as
this--outside of Communist party lines and control--could
work against the Communist parties. The Argentine official
pointed out that precipitous action, without mass support or
psychological preparation, could compromise the regular
efforts of the parties to build for future battles. The PCB
leaders refused to accept the PCA's stand, and PCA President
Victorio Codovilla went to Moscow in May to confer with
Khrushchev and to come to an agreement with Castro, who
was then making his long visit to Moscow. After meeting
with Castro he notified the PCA Central Committee that Castro
had accepted the party's position and had promised to suspend
the revolutionary program on his return to Havana. He said
Castro admitted that he had not realized how much dissension
and bitterness Cuban support of non-party leftist groups was
causing in the Communist parties.
3. The Peruvian Party Protest.
In this same month (May 1963), a CP Bolivia
delegation was severely berated at a meeting in Moscow with
CPSU members for being involved in guerrilla operations
against Peru. It was told that a formal complaint submitted
by Jorge del Prado Chavez, First Secretary of the Communist
Party of Peru (PCP), against the PCB had, among other things,
accused the PCB of violating the international Communist
accords of 1957 and 1960 through interference in the internal
affairs of another Communist party. The delegation protested
fruitlessly that the PCP had full knowledge of the operation and
- had given its prior consent. They were bluntly asked not to
intervene in the future in the internal affairs of another Communist
party. On the other hand, the CPSU spokesman said that if the
PCB felt that conditions were ripe within Bolivia, and if the PCB
had sufficient strength to carry out a successful effort, it should
initiate guerrilla activities in its own country.
Thus not only Cuba, but the Bolivian party leadership
as well, was being attacked for intervention in the affairs of
other parties.
-9-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKEROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
4. The Bolivian Party Protest.
In October 1963 it was the PCB's turn to protest.
It charged the Cuban Embassy in La Paz with using PCB
and Communist youth members in its organizing of terrorist
and sabotage groups for operations in La Paz. The PCB
thus turned against the Cubans the charge of meddling in
the internal affairs of the PCB and protested that this was
destroying the integrity of the party. Claiming that the
PCB could not take any direct action to stop the Cuban
activity because of the serious internal problems it would
create for the party, the PCB said it was thinking of
denouncing Cuban interference in the internal affairs of
the PCB at the next international gathering of Communist
parties, then expected to take place in Moscow in November.
5. In other countries, also, the Communist parties
attacked Cuban interference, though such attacks were not
made public. In Panama, for example, the CP prepared
an internal document for party leaders only which enumerated
cases of Cuban "indifference" to the CP and encouragement
of the extremist VAN, which was attributed to "second
echelon officials and the petty-bourgeois foundation of the
Cuban revolution." Both Cuban and Chinese attempts to
direct the Panamanian revolution were attacked privately
by party leaders, who were warned that pro-Chinese petty
bourgeois influence might cause the Cubans to assume an
anti-Soviet position at any moment.
C. The Havana Conference--an Expression of Loyalty to
Moscow.
One of the most interesting questions concerning the
relationship of the 1964 Havana meeting to the earlier Latin
American party conferences is raised by the publicity that it has
been given since mid-January 1965. Earlier, the secrecy
observed in connection with the meetings was paralleled by
Soviet cautioning of the parties not to identify themselves openly--
and particularly, the coordinated programs they were to develop--
-10-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
with the USSR. But in 1965 it was a TASS release in Moscow
that first focused international attention on the meeting. (A
*press interview given at home by a Bolivian CP leader in early
December was completely ignored by Communist media
elsewhere.) In the light of evidence from other parts of the
world, such as the Middle East, it is likely that this change
in approach has been dictated at least in part by a Soviet
desire to strengthen its control and manifest authority over
the Communist parties of the developing countries in the Free
World. If nothing else, the informal, "unanimous" endorsement
at the end of 1964 of the declarations of 1957 and 1960 can be
interpreted by the CPSU as a declaration of the loyalty of the
Latin American parties--including, for the first time, the
Cuban PURS--to Moscow.
While the November Havana Conference unquestionably
was sponsored by the CPSU, its initiation was technically left
to Latin American parties--CP Bolivia and CP Uruguay according
to some reports, and the CP's of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and
Bolivia, according to others. On precedent, it seems probable
that Bolivia, and Uruguay would have been the most interested
initiators of such a conference for the CPSU. It has in fact been
reported that some of the parties in the countries around Bolivia
were unenthusiastic and felt that such a conference would be
fruitless. Uruguay has often expressed its great concern about
unity in the international Communist movement, and the Bolivians,
after a period of collusion with the Cubans, subsequently
experienced Cuban interference in what they deem to be their
internal affairs.
D. The Conference Convenes.
In early November 1964 various leaders and representatives
of Latin American Communist parties who were in Moscow for the
November celebration began to prepare documents and an agenda
for a meeting of Latin American Communist parties to be held in
Havana later in the month. According to one source, the CPSU
wanted the Havana meeting held for the purpose of discussing the
-11-
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
Sino-Soviet dispute as well as other problems of common
interest to the Latin American Communist parties. Travel
of the delegates, as well as the printing of the approved
documents after the meeting, were to be paid for by the CPSU.
In mid-November 1964, additional Latin American
Communist party leaders began to leave for Moscow, which
suggests that the first group was operating as a kind of
preparatory committee.
From Moscow the groups went to Havana, where the
Latin American meeting was held from 22 to 29 November 1964.
It is not known how many of the participants in the conference
went directly to Havana.
I
Following the Havana meeting, a group
a returned returned to Moscow, where
they worked with others on the final editing of the documents
approved in Havana.
A delegation of some ten Latin American Communist
leaders, who in all probability were with the group that returned
to Moscow, went on to Communist China, carrying out a decision
that had been taken at the conference itself. This group tried
to get the Chinese to agree to work more closely with the USSR
to lessen tension in the Communist world, particularly in Latin
America, and to accept the policy of not supporting groups that
did not have proper endorsement. No agreement was reached,
however, and the delegates received no satisfaction from the
Chinese, who treated them courteously but very coldly. The
Chinese allegedly reaffirmed their determination to recognize
and cooperate with "true Marxist-Leninists" who opposed Soviet
policies, and made it clear that there was no chance that they
would yield to pressure, no matter how many parties opposed
them.
Most of the few known delegates to the Havana Conference
returned to their native countries during the latter part of
December 1964, or in early January 1965. (See Appendix:
"Identified Participants in the Conference and Related Events.")
-12-
SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
The Havana CP Conference of November 1964, if it
has in fact resolved the problems that developed among Latin
American Communists over the past three to four years,
establishes new bases of Soviet-Cuban subversive collaboration.
Effective planning, coordination, and vigorous efforts to carry
out programs on a regional and sub-regional basis, after the
pattern of the years before 1960, may be expected in 1965--
though not without the possibility of disruptive or independent
action by recalcitrant pro-Castroist or pro-Chinese elements.
III. The Conference Decisions.
A. The Regional "Solidarity" Projects for 1965.
Four region-wide solidarity projects were approved
at Havana:
1. A campaign of solidarity with Cuba.
2. A general campaign of solidarity with Latin
American anti-imperialist struggles.
3. A campaign for the release of political
prisoners in various Latin American countries.
4. A specific solidarity campaign in support of
the "combative struggle" of the Venezuelan
people.
The implementation of a number of the conference...
objectives in the field of solidarity activity began promptly.
Indeed, some preliminary steps were taken even before the
conference communique formalized the projects. Meetings
during the Cuban Week of Solidarity with Venezuela that
immediately preceded the party conference in Havana provided
an excellent opportunity for working out the specifics of projects
that would fit in the over-all program. Moreover, a Society of
Soviet-Cuban Friendship was officially created in Moscow on
-13-
SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE ONLY
11 November 1964, in the presence of Giraldo Mazola and other
members of a Cuban delegation representing the Cuban Institute
of Peoples' Friendship (ICAP). This new body in the USSR may
well serve hereafter as a Soviet instrument for supporting and
promoting action in Latin America, after coordination on the
policy level, through the channels provided by Soviet officials
working with other friendship societies in Latin America, since
the Soviet equivalents of the friendship societies abroad work
under a single body in Moscow--the Union of Soviet Societies for
Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries--with
which the Soviet intelligence services are deeply involved.
Moreover, this body has as one of its components an association
that deals only with countries of Latin America. A CPSU official,
M. F. Kudatchkin, long identified with the CPSU Foreign Section's
work in Latin America, arrived to join the new Soviet Embassy
in Santiago, Chile, as of the beginning of February, and may
well play a key role in guidance and coordination of regional
activity.
On 22 November, the day on which the conference
opened, the Secretary of the Cuban-Mexican Society for Cultural
Relations returned from a one-month visit to Mexico, during
which she visited the University of Morelia and contacted Mexican
intellectual and cultural figures. While the specifics of her
discussions are not known, it is likely that they involved planning
for 1965 activities.
While each of the four region-wide solidarity projects
may involve a separate organization effort, they are clearly
intended to be mutually supporting and to work toward a single
goal. The Cuban campaign is being built around two themes--
Cuban right of self-determination and demands that other Latin
American governments adopt a policy of non-intervention in
Cuban affairs. The general anti-imperialist solidarity campaign
will also advocate self-determination, but in addition will take
the offensive, exposing and attacking alleged acts of "imperialist
intervention." The amnesty campaign, by its defense of "patriots,"
will spearhead the attack against local anti-Communists and
-14-
-SEGRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND OSE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET/NO FOREIGN DISSEM
BACKGROUND USE UNLY
anti-Communist national governments. The Venezuelan
campaign, dealing as it does with the presently most significant
test case of Communist subversion in Latin America, will
involve elements of all three general campaigns. Whatever
contribution it may make to supporting and encouraging the
liberation struggle in Venezuela, this campaign clearly will
also serve as a testing mechanism through whose operations
each of the Communist parties can assess which of the various
projects is most likely to produce results in its own national
environment.
B. First Organizational Moves in the Solidarity Campaigns.
1. On 8 January, an Uruguayan pro-Cuban front
(FIDEL) demonstrated in favor of renewal of Uruguayan-Cuban
diplomatic relations and at the same time announced the formation
of a "Latin American Congress of Solidarity with Cuba and for
the Self-Determination of Peoples," to be held in Montevideo
2-4 April 1965. There is little doubt that many CP's--and the
Soviets as well--will make a major effort to mobilize the greatest
and most impressive participation possible for this event (which
is comparable to the 1961 National Liberation Congress held in
Mexico), if only to demonstrate to Cuba, China, and the world
the willingness and capabilities of the orthodox CP's in LA to
support Cuba and the liberation movement as long as agreements
on a common policy are observed. A number of similar
conferences in recent years have been postponed or subtly
sabotaged by local Communist foot-dragging in the face of Cuban
efforts to dominate policy. The local parties also stand to gain.
Uruguayan Communists are already reported to be optimistic
that the Havana agreement will reduce inner party friction and
permit greater local influence to be achieved by FIDEL, their
popular political front.
External support for this Congress has
already been received.
and Chilean Communist parties met in Buenos Aires during
2