1000000
104-10414-10124
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
P854 no full text
1,3-00000
THIS FOLDER CONTAINS NOTES ON CLASSIFIED MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS AND NOTES GENERATED
HSCA STAFF MEMBER:
UPON ACCOUNTABLE PAGES HEREIN
PAGE NUMBERS OF NOTES ON CLASSIFIED MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA:
Mexico City history
PAGE NUMBERS OF ACCOUNTABLE NOTE PAPER ISSUED FOR FURTHER NOTES GENERATED AT HSCA
DATE
FOLDER REQUESTED BY (PRINT NAME)
REQUESTOR'S SIGNATURE
23.09.184
G.R. Baky
*ca wempiandum
lại
the Record 24.08.78.
ALL PAGES HEREIN ARE ACCOUNTABLE
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FOLDER
13-00000
These pages
worked by
colaken and lov
Cornwell
Goldsmith, whiến
he renewal A
16 Nov
PC
mont
13-00000
history
60
poges
us muem.
ITSCA Galdsmil
16 Nov 08
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
16 November 1978
OLC Record copy.
HSCA
OLC #78-4019
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT : HSCA Access to Mexico City History
1. HSCA requested access to some 200 pages of the
three-volume history of Mexico City about a third of
the material. The substantive content runs the gamut from
the history of Mexico University through detailed operation-
al support capabilities and high level political connect.
ions and activities. It is an impressive accumulation of
operational activity - classical sources and methods, as
well as detailed revelations about past events.
2. We pointed out that the agreement between Chairman
Stokes and DDCI Carlucci directly faced the issue of the
irrelevancy of the vast majority of the history, and the
sensitivity of it. The HSCA position had been that it had
to verify this, and the access given to senior levels was
to satisfy this. Now it was being requested in connection
with depositions, which would serve to get this material
into a Committee transcript. Since some two-thirds of the
station's history (the work covers 1947 through 1969) pre-
ceded the visit of Oswald to Mexico in 1963 and assassination
of the President, that clearly had nothing to do with the
Committee's charter. I added that Mr. Carlucciis out of
town, and will not be back until some time Sunday, so I
could not go back to him. The request was so far beyond the
agreement, that I felt I could not modify it. Cornwell then
asked that I speak to the Director.
3.
I saw the Director at about noon, and summarized:
the agreement and the dilemma, also going over the above.
He stated that I could offer access to one senior staff
member (in addition to Blakey and Cornwell)on the condition
that material from the history not be used in depositions.
4.
He
I spoke with Cornwell, giving him the message.
said that they may wish to use some of the material. I
replied that the history is based on other sources; those
related to the portion that is within the Committee's charter
CONFIDENTIAL
2 IMPDET CL BY
BY13190
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
was based entirely on sources to which Committee investi-
gator's have had access. Our problem was the overall
collection, and particularly some of the substance of the
history. He asked if he could come back and ask for it,
if they wanted to use something in particular.
I said
that we had never closed a door completely, but that the
Director's condition was fairly clear. Those things
relevant to their authorized inquiry were already in
their hands, so I could not think what they would have
to use from this. They will ask us, and we can react
when they do.
5. Goldsmith came over to start reading.
Distribution:
1 F. Hitz/OLC
1 H. Smith/SA/DDCI
1
N. Shepanek/PCS/LOC
1 W. Sturbitts/LA/Div
1- OLC/Subj
1-OLC/Chrono
S. D. Breckinridge
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
SECRET
CLC #124019/1
HSCA
24 August 1978
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Examination by Mr. G. Robert Blakey of Sanitized
Portions of History of Mexico City Station
1. At 1745 hours on 23 August 1978, Mr. Scott Breckinridge,
Mr. Norbert Shepanek and the undersigned met with Mr. G. Robert
Blakey, Chief Counsel of the House Select Committee on
Assassinations (HSCA). The meeting took place in Mr. Breckinridge's
office. The purpose of the meeting, inter alia, was to make
available to Mr. Blakey certain sanitized portions of CS HP 329
(SECRET), a three volume history of the Mexico City Station
covering the period 1947
1969. The portions selected for
sanitization were previously designated by Mr. Gary Cornwell as
being of interest to the HSCA. Mr. Edwin Lopez, of the HSCA
if, was also present, but did not have access to the Mexico
City Station material.
-
2. Mr. Blakey was furnished the following sanitized portions
of the Station history which he read in my presence:
a. Volume I, Chapter II (C) Station Expansion and
Joint Operations (1959-1969), consisting of pages 34 through 57.
b. Volume II, Chapter III (A-3)
consisting of pages 221 through 256.
The Cuban Embassy,
c. Volume II, Chapter III (A-4)
Operational Support and
Technical Collection Activities, consisting of pages 257 through 298.
d. Volume II, Chapter III (B) Covert Action Operations
(portion relating to student operations only), consisting of pages
327 through 336.
e. Volume II, Chapter IV Joint Operations and Projects.
Using Mexican Government Officials (portions relating to Project
LIENVOY and LITEMPO only), consisting of pages 409 through 423.
Merida Base (1962 1965),
f. Volume III, Chapter X
consisting of pages 485 through 494.
SECRET
1
3.
I assured Mr. Blakey that I would be happy to discuss
with him any of the deleted items and explain the nature of
the content and the reason for its deletion. I told Mr. Blakey
that since he was personally reviewing the material, and the
same would hold true for Mr. Cornwell, I felt that I could be
very candid in describing the deleted portions. Mr. Blakey
thanked me, but did not at any time raise any questions about
deletions. After he had finished his reivew I repeated my
offer to discuss any portion of the material. He again thanked
me and said he had no questions.
4. Mr. Blakey did not indicate (nor did I ask) whether
he would continue to seek access to the entire three volume
history in its unsanitized form.
Martin't. Hawkins
C/LA/MGSB
SECRET
13-00000
MEXICO CITY STATION History
200 selected pages
Blakey reviewed on 23 August 1978
13-00000
SECRET
Historian's Note
This paper covers activities of the CIA sta-
tion in Mexico City and bases in Monterrey, Nogales,
and Merida from 1947 to 30 June 1969. While re-
search on this paper was being done from late 1969
to mid-1970, some projects of long duration were
terminated for security or economic reasons. In
those instances, the descriptions of these activi-
ties extend beyond 30 June 1969.
Because the paper is not indexed, the table
of contents contains a detailed synopsis of each
chapter. The reader will note some repetition of
operational events in the text. There is a reason
for this. Chapters I and II were an effort on the
part of the writer to reduce to a reading minimum
a chronological summary of the origins of CIA oper-
ations in Mexico from 1947 to 1969 for persons who
do not have the time or the need to read several
hundred pages of station history. Subsequent chapters
treat the projects in more detail.
For the convenience of the reader, the writer
has grouped together those projects which pertain to
iii
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the same target. Each of these target categories
begins with an introduction which is nothing more
than a brief history of the target for the benefit
of persons not familiar with the Mexico operations.
The Mexico City Station had one of the most
extensive and expensive unilateral technical col-
lection programs conducted by the Agency. For that
reason, those projects are presented together,
although they are also mentioned in station coverage
of specific targets. These unilateral projects had
two characteristics which should be remembered:
the majority of those still current in 1969 were
sources turned over to the station in 1947 by the
FBI or were recruited from contacts of these sources;
the agent networks in the unilateral operations were
a series of family relationships.
Readers may be confused by a Mexico Station
practice of changing cryptonyms of sources when
they were switched from one project to another.
Some sources used by Mexico were identified by as
many as four project cryptonyms. Insofar as possible,
the writer included all the previous cryptonyms for
iv
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the convenience of readers who may wish to review
the inactive projects in which the sources were
used.
Inactive project, chronological, and subject
files were provided by Lucille Long and Dorothy
Kishter of the Records Integration Division (RID),
both of whom devoted considerable time to search-
ing indexes for records which were not included in
the Clandestine Service records system. A presenta-
tion of the current projects (1969) could not have
been written without the cooperation and generous
assistance of all personnel of the Mexico Branch
of the WH Division in making available their oper-
ational files which were excellently maintained in
comparison with other records.
Anne Goodpasture
Historical Writer
Western Hemisphere Division
-V-
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
responded by asking that Jones be assigned to
Mexico City as a "civil attache" to investigate
the activities of German residents.
Jones opened the FBI office in Mexico City
in June 1942 on the second floor of an office build-
ing at Londres 85, across the street from the US
Embassy chancery and residence which was loca ted
in a compound at Londres 101. He had a staff of
two men, the assistant civil attache, Marion Stokes
Davis, and the chief clerk, Charles Turnbull. In
the fall of 1942 Clarence Moore replaced Jones,
and in August 1943 Birch D. O'Neal replaced Moore.
10/
By mid-1943 the FBI had between 25 and 30 agents
working under cover
sover throughout Mexico. One of them
S(Raym s (Raymond J. O'Mara) who became the chief of the
was
CIA station in Mexico in 1951. The number of
slots in the Mexico City
office had also increased to eight. These agents
concentrated on two cases which involved extensive
investigations, the code names of which were ALTO
and CLOG. The ALTO case involved censorship of
letters of persons trying to obtain the release
32
32
8
:
SECRET
YARI SIBR
13-00000
SECRET
and Captain W. C. Ford (USN). They visited 16
countries in Latin America to examine relationships
between station officers and those in other Embassy
components, station morale, and operational and
administrative matters. A memorandum prepared by
these inspectors after their return to Headquarters
noted that Ambassador Walter C. Thurston was com-
pletely satisfied with the manner in which Doyle
was handling his operations. The same memorandum
reported that the administration and operations
were in excellent condition, and that the Mexico
City Station gave every indication of being the
177
outstanding station on the circuit,
In the early years the station acquired some
surveillance assets for sporadic use on the CP and
leftist groups, but they had no organized team that
could cover the activities of Soviet Embassy offi-
cials. The FBI refused to turn over the background
data from their files on the Soviets. Furthermore,
it soon became apparent that the Mexican Government
could not be relied upon to provide detailed cover-
age of the activities of such a large number of the
-16
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
Soviet Bloc officials who had complete freedom of
movement all over Mexico and clandestinely into the
United States.
The Mexican security agents had
neither the training nor the motivation for this
sort of effort. Accordingly, the station embarked
on a program to develop unilateral support operations.
This was not to the detriment of the other
targets which, according to SOI 23, took priority
over the Soviets. LIFTER, LIBETHENITE, and
LIONHEART (turned over by the FBI) were covering
Communist and leftist activities.
LIBELER (turned
over by the FBI) was a high-ranking Mexican Govern-
ment official who kept the station fairly well in-
formed on events that were happening inside govern-
ment circles. He also provided some personality
information on the Soviet officials with whom he
came in contact.
B.
Development of Unilateral Operations (1951-1958)
The first significant, productive unilateral
support operation was developed by Charles W. Ander-
son, III, in October 1950. This was LIFEAT, which
in 1969 passed its 19th anniversary.
Initially a
17
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
small telephone tap operation with a yearly budget
under $5,000, it developed into a large, sophisti-
cated, audio operation covering telephones, TELEX*
systems, and microphone plants with capabilities
limited only by the availability of persons to man
the recorders and transcrihe the take. In 1969
the LIFEAT budget was $102,000.
In the process of getting the telephone tap
operations under way, other support agent prospects
were developed. LIMESTONE (201-150706), a Mexican
employee of the Hoof and Mouth Control Unit, US
Department of Agriculture; and LIMEWATER (201-
183704), a telephone company supervisor, were the
original LIFEAT agents. They suggested their sons,
daughters, parents, in-laws, and friends for recruit-
ment. From this assortment, the first 12 agents
were recruited for an umbrella-type project (LIPSTICK)
to provide mobile and fixed surveillance teams to
parallel LIFEAT and to man three photo observation
These agents were
posts around the Soviet Embassy.
all untrained in clandestine activities; they were
* Automatic Teletypewriter Exchange Service
(of Western Union).
-
18
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
mechanics, clerks, salesmen, a housewife, and the
quarterback on the football team at the University
of Mexico. Their one common bond was that they
were related in some way to LIMESTONE and LIMEWATER.
This project was developed by Charles Anderson and
Harry T. Mahoney. These original LIPSTICK agents
formed the nucleus for the extensive operational
support projects in Mexico, and in 1969 many of
them were still on the job.
-
E. Howard Hunt opened the first Office of
Policy Coordination (OPC) station in Mexico in
December 1950. This office was combined with the
Office of Special Operations (OSO) in 1952. The
base in Monterrey, Mexico, with a staff of two,
was opened in the US Consulate in June 1951 by
John H. Jenkins, Jr.
While the station was developing unilateral
support operations, contact was continued with the
head of the Mexican Security Service (Direccion
Federal de Seguridad DFS). In 1952, a police
training officer, Robert L. Melberg, was assigned
to Mexico under official cover. His assignment
:
19
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
was to develop and train a liaison investigative
unit to be used jointly against the Communist target.
The head of the DFS designated a group of five
agents who could be used in this project (LIVESTOCK).
No sooner had the training program started, than
LIVESTOCK-2 (the team leader) shot a politician.
This killing by a member of the President's secur-
ity service caused such an uproar in the newspapers
that LIVESTOCK-2 was jailed until the public forgot
about it, which was almost two years later.
In early 1954, while Harry T. Mahoney and
his wife were occupying temporary quarters after
their arrival in Mexico City, a young Mexican-
American student tapped on the door one day. He
introduced himself to Mahoney's wife as a student
at Mexico City College. He explained that his
mother was an American schoolteacher, and that he
was working his way through college by selling
eggs, chickens, and cheese to people in the apart-
ment building where the Mahoneys lived. That even-
ing Mahoney learned about the egg salesman and
stayed home the next day to meet him. After that
20
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
meeting, Mahoney checked citizenship files in the
Embassy and gathered enough background information
for a request for an operational clearance. The
salesman was Raymond H. GERENDE (201-119523) who
became the principal agent for the photographic
bases, acted as a transcriber for LIFEAT, alternated
as a handler for the unilateral surveillance teams,
and performed various other operational tasks from
1955 until 1970.* His family and friends provided
a recruitment field for several other agents within
the operational support agent network of the station.
Ia 1954, the budget requirements for the
18/
Mexico City Station were $463,692. The five cate-
gories were:
Station Support
FI
FI/OA
PP
PP Project Development
$275,545
133,795
15,000
35,352
4,000
•
There were 19 foreign intelligence (FI) and six
political and psychological warfare (PP) field
projects. The same year, the Deputy Chief, FI,
at Headquarters, Ronald A. MacMillan, sent Walter
Jessel to Mexico to observe what MacMillan regarded
* GERENDE was terminated on 26 June 1970 because of
security problems arising from hostile divorce
action by his European wife.
21
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
as the finest technical surveillance operations in
19/
the Agency. The table of organization (T/O) at
that time totaled 18 (10 officers and 8 clerical).
From January 1953 to March 1954, the station for-
warded 337 FI reports to Headquarters of which 324
were disseminated to customer agencies.
By 1955 the-Mexico City Station had tapped
every telephone line in the Soviet, Czechoslovakian
and Polish embassies, as well as the Communist Party
headquarters.
In addition, Projects LIFEAT and
LIPSTICK had the capability for a quick swing off
to cover targets of opportunity as they arose. There
was contact with the Mexican Security Service and the
FBI. The latter then had a large staff of 20 to 30
people in Mexico and used the cover of legal attache
in the US Embassy.
Operational support projects by the end of 1955
included two indigenous surveillance teams, four obser-
vation posts, a photosurveillance truck, a 20-line tele-
phone tapping capability, and several independent in-
vestigators. All of these operations were handled on a
unilateral basis.
22
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
The CIA base in Nogales, Mexico, with a staff
of two was opened in
by Robert T. Shaw.
in May 1956
Another person recommended by LIMESTONE was
LIKAYAK-2 (201-119970). He was recruited by Ander-
son in 1956. LIKAYAK-2 developed the unilateral
mail intercept and Mexican Government file search
project (LIBIGHT). Indirectly, LIKAYAK-2 laid the
groundwork for the joint telephone tap operation
(LIENVOY) by introducing his Mexican mentor
(LIELEGANT) to his station case officer, Alfonso G.
Spera, in 1958. In 1969 the LIBIGHT Project, with
LIKAYAK-2 as the principal agent, passed its 13th
anniversary.
Shortly after Winston M. Scott* was appointed
* A native of Alabama, he had served as a professor,
FBI officer, and a naval officer assigned to the
X-2 Section of the Office of Strategic Services
(OSS) in London during World War II. He was Chief,
Office of Special Operations (OSO) in London from
January 1947 to January 1950. At Headquarters from
January 1950 until December 1952, Scott was Chief,
WE, and from 1952 to May 1956 he was Chief, Inspec-
tion and Review Staff. While Scott had had no pre-
vious experience in Mexico, he had served with the
FBI in Havana and had a broad understanding of intel-
ligence operations from his Headquarters and European
assignments.
23
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
COS in early 1956, the WH Division (WH) prepared
a proposal for reclassification of the Mexico City
Station T/O which raised the COS slot to GS-17 and
the deputy Chief of Station (DCOS) slot to GS-16,
contingent on the simultaneous reclassification of
chiefs and deputy chiefs of station at Rio de Janeiro,
Buenos Aires, and Santiago to GS-16 and GS-15 to be
compatible with emphasis placed on these countries
20/
by the stepped-up program for Latin America.
When Scott arrived in Mexico on 8 August 1956,
Lyman D. Kirkpatrick and Turner Smith were there con-
ducting a review of the Station. The inspectors noted
in their report that lack of clerical and operational
personnel had caused problems in administration and in
the utilization of operational data from the technical
operations. The inspectors further noted that Ambas-
sador Francis A. White. and Counselor William P. Snow
* White, at age 61, was appointed as Ambassador to Mexico
in 1953 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower. White had
been a career Foreign Service officer (1915 to 1933)
and resigned as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Pleni-
potentiary to Czechoslovakia when Franklin D. Roosevelt
was elected. At the time White was appointed to Mexico,
he was a banking executive. He followed flamboyant
William D. O'Dwyer. The atmosphere at the Embassy
changed to reflect the appearance of the chief. White
was elderly, portly, quiet, business-oriented, and very
conservative.
:
24
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the same title of other embassy section chiefs
(Consular Section, Political Section, Economic
Section, and United States Information Service
24/
(USIS)).
Headquarters agreed with the title
for the station but the chief's title was changed
from "attache" to "First Secretary." The DCOS
and the covert action (CA) officer had the title
of "Second Secretary." No other officers were
In December 1956 the station rented a small two-
story house which had a maid's room on the roof that
was an ideal lookout into the adjoining garden of
the Soviet Embassy. This was used as a third photo-
graphic base to observe the activities of the Soviet
officials and their visitors.* In September 1957,
the station (through LIMOUSINE, 201-5762) purchased
* This project first had the cryptonym LIPSTICK/
LICALLA. Two other photographic bases, LIPSTICK/
LIMITED and LIPSTICK/LILYRIC, were located across
the street from the front entrance to the Soviet
Embassy in separate apartments. These three bases
were later managed through the LIEMPTY Project.
28
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
the property adjacent to the Soviet Embassy.* The
four houses, including LIPSTICK/LICALLA, were re-
modeled by CIA. The three vacant houses were rented
to selected tenants. It was planned to place a moni-
toring device in
of each house.
were purchased and
sent to Headquarters where the installation was made.
When the
were returned by special plane, it
was discovered that the audio unit had been put in
the
which faced the street instead of the one
adjacent to the Soviet Embassy compound. This origi-
nal disappointment did not alter the later importance
of the property for very sensitive, highly classified
close support audio operations.
on
The station offices until mid-1957 were located
Mexico City.
were moved to
building in downtown
After the 1957 earthquake, the offices
25/
of the same building
* The property consisted of four row houses, one of
which was LIPSTICK/LICALLA, but the occupants were
not aware that CIA owned the property. LICALLA
paid the rent to the ostensible owner and was
handled as a part of LIEMPTY. Operationally, the
other three houses were a part of the LIMESA/
LIMUST Project.
29
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
elaborate briefings took place with various visual
aid props prepared by the station.*
Unilateral agents in the umbrella support
project (LIPSTICK) numbered 49 in early 1958 with
members of the surveillance teams, basehouse oper-
ators, transcribers, and general handymen all re-
lated to each other. This relationship of the
agents was thought to be good security until
LIEMBRACE-1 and LIPSTICK-47 were arrested by the
Mexican Secret Service while on surveillance in
June 1958, and the whole network fell apart.
Through hasty recruitment of a prominent American
lawyer, the station paid
for release of the agents,
but not before they had revealed all of the cases
they were working on and the identity of their
CIA case officer. The remnants of the project
were separated into four operations
.
* This project continued until August 1961 when
Ambassador Thomas C. Mann said he did not want
any American businessmen involved in these
briefings.
33
SECRET
13-00000
c.
SECRET
Station Expansion and Joint Operations
(1959 1969)
-
The only new requirement in the Related Mis-
sions Directive (RMD)* for 1959 was the addition
of the Chinese Communists as a minor reporting tar-
get even though there was no official Chinese Com-
munist establishment in Mexico.
(The Mexicans had
diplomatic relations with the Chinese Nationalist
Government.) There was a flurry of
vity
acti-
which resulted in
having a troupe of Chinese Communist acrobats
31/
denied entry to Mexico.
The outstanding achievement of the station in
early 1959 was the setting up of a joint 32-line**
telephone tap center (LIENVOY), backstopped by the
President of Mexico.
This gave the station the
capability for intensified coverage of the Soviet
32/
and Satellite installations.
In July 1959 the Nogales Base, after operating
33/
for three years, was closed.
;
*
See Appendix D
** Two of these lines were reserved for testing
equipment.
34
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
General James Doolittle of the President's Board of
Advisors on Foreign Intelligence Activities visited
Mexico for a study of station activities. Pat M.
Holt of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee was
briefed on Soviet and CP activities during the same
42/
month.
In November 1961, two inspectors from the staff
of the Inspector-General (IG) spent four days in-
specting the station. The inspectors reported that
the Mexico City Station was the best in WH and pos-
sibly one of the best in the Agency. It had a broad
range of assets commencing with a close personal
relationship between the station chief and the Presi-
dent of Mexico, high-level telephone taps, photo-
graphic surveillance, unilateral intelligence assets,
and a broad scale of CA capabilities. The station
had been aggressive and well managed with the eхсер-
tion of a possible tendency to neglect administra-
tive details. During 1961 the station produced 722
intelligence reports of which about 45 percent came
from telephone tap operations. The technical facili-
ties and capabilities were described as extraordinary
The intercept operation under
and impressive.
:
39
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
for offensive purposes. On 25 October 1962, with
the approval of Headquarters and Ambassador Mann,
Scott met with Lopez Mateos in Mexico City and
showed him photographs (supplied by Headquarters)
of some of the areas where Soviet missiles and
launching sites were located in Cuba. Lopez was
49/
very grateful for this briefing.
In November 1962, approval was obtained to
open a base in
03
03
Merida, Yucatan.
Jack Stewart opened the base in December 1962. The
base was to provide support to possible paramilitary
50/
operations against Cuba.
In January 1963, four additional secretaries
arrived at the Mexico City Station with designee
cover. They were needed because of the increased
emphasis on technical operations against the Cuban
and Soviet installations and the vast quantity of
paper produced by these operations which could not
51/
be processed by the previous staff.
At the request of Headquarters and the Guatemala
Station, the Mexico City Station devoted a great
deal of time and manpower to the coverage of the
11
TITI
42
डाहर
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
activities of Juan Jose Arevalo Bermejo (201-006803),
former President of Guatemala, and a candidate in
the 1963 presidential elections of Guatemala.
Sta-
tion operations against Arevalo included a LIFEAT
telephone tap, an informant (LICOOKY), and physical
and photographic surveillance (LIEMBRACE and LIENTRAP).
From some of the information collected through these
sources, the Mexico City Station prepared a compos-
ite photograph of Arevalo and the Soviet military
attache to Mexico, Alexander G. Sidorov (201-018498),
standing together in the lobby of the apartment build-
ing where Sidorov lived. This photograph appeared
in at least three Guatemalan newspapers.
52/
In May 1963, Scott learned "confidentially"
from Gustavo Diaz Ordaz that he would be selected
by Lopez Mateos as the next President of Mexico.
Later in the year, Diaz became the PRI candidate
(tantamount to election) which assured LIENVOY, of
an extended six years under virtually the same
management.
53/
54/
In 1963 the routine reporting of an operational
lead by LIENVOY developed into a long investigation.
43
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
A man with a US accent, speaking broken Russian,
telephoned both the Soviet and Cuban Embassies on
26 September and 6 October 1963. He identified
himself as Lee Oswald and Harvey Oswald. This
information was cabled to Headquarters for traces
and identifying data. After the assassination of
President Kennedy on 22 November 1963 in Dallas,
Texas, the Mexico City Station spent several months
investigating leads in connection with Oswald's
55/
visit to Mexico.
The outside counterespionage/counterintelligence
(CE/CI) unit (LILINK) was activated in December 1963
and was envisaged as an unofficial composite of the
station which would reduce the number of official
cover positions.*
During January 1964, Headquarters approved and
furnished equipment (radio central and four auto-
mobile radios) for the chief of station to give on
loan to Gustavo Diaz Ordaz as an aid to the future
56/
President of Mexico during his campaign. In addi-
tion to the equipment, CIA gave Diaz Ordaz $400 per
* The project failed and was terminated in 1967.
-44
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
month as a subsidy from December 1963 to November
1964. It was ostensibly to pay for his two body-
guards during his campaign tours. In reality, it
was paid to LITEMPO-1 (Diaz Ordaz' nephew) and may
well have gone into his pocket. This was in addi-
tion to a regular salary of $512 per month paid to
LITEMPO-1 as a station support agent.
The LITEMPO Project provided cover for a
16-millimeter passport camera concealed at the
Mexico City International Airport. For the first
two years, Robert Zambernardi, the station technical
officer, serviced the camera and picked up the film
during meetings with the Mexican Chief Immigration
Inspector (LITEMPO-10) in locations other than the
airport. In 1964 the operation was turned over to
their replacements, Lewis D. Humphrey, Jr. and
LITEMPO-11). Later, the operation was turned over
completely to indigenous personnel under LITEMPO-12.
The film was delivered by LITEMPO-12 to his case
58/
officer for processing by the station. All pass-
ports of travellers arriving in Mexico City from
Havana were photographed. This was a strategic
* This camera was installed in 1962 by Warren L.
Dean and two LIFIRE agents.57/
45
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
spot because Mexico was the only direct air link
between Cuba and Latin America.
Station personnel devoted considerable time
providing support for JMWAVE and other stations on
a worldwide basis in their coverage of the Cuban
target. This support consisted of:
obtaining
travel permits for Cubans to enter Mexico; obtain-
ing visas for Cubans to enter the United States;
renting and servicing accommodation addresses; and
briefing, debriefing, training, and dispatching
agents to and from Cuba. The station also handled
Cuban defectors who chose to make the last minute
jump in Mexico City rather than return to Havana.
59/
One of the most demanding of these support cases
was the reception and protection of the younger sis-
ter of Fidel Castro Ruz who was surfaced in Mexico
City on radio and television on 29 June 1964. The
station then kept her sequestered for the better
part of a month. She and her two friends were first
accommodated for four days