14-00000
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
104-10103-10354
03
Dear George,
6/PV
NICOLE SZULC
23
[8761]
14 November 1974
?
이
We attach a note which we have received from (FETCH Jand
which will be of interest to you. We would be grateful for any
traces and your comments.
[mi-6 rep in Hawara)
Yours sincerely,
24
03
Mr George B Holmes
Att: a/s
06
A. N. S. Walker
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
14-00000
こうい
NICOLE SZULC
1.
We would be grateful for traces on Nicole SZULC, American
a group which carries out
intelligence operations.
freelance journalist, age 27/29. She apparently also works Car Center for
Chief in HAVANA in 1959.
research into American security and National for
Her father was New York Times Bureau
SZULC is a strong sympathiser of the
studios.
Cuban regime: by her own account she has come to Cuba for one
month at Cuban invitation to gather material on CIA operations
in Cuba, past and present, and to "assist" the Cubans in uncovering
new leads to current CIA intelligence activity (particularly among
the foreign community). She was last in Cuba in 1971. SZULC made
her first approach to the Cuban Embassy in MEXICO CITY several
months ago with a request for Cuban material on CIA operations.
The Cubans responded by inviting her to a clandestine-type meeting
in NEW YORK where she met Cuban officials accredited to the UN in
a car. At that meeting no material was provided but she was asked
to come to Cuba as soon as possible in order to carry out "joint
research". SZULC spent the month of October in Brazil where she
has family (she is half Brazilian) and arrived in HAVANA on a
flight from LIMA on 9 November. She had appointments with MINREX
on 13 November to discuss her "programme" for the next four weeks.
:
2. I met SZULC first on 12 November at REGIN's (Reuter)
appartment where she called to see him while I was paying him a
brief, unheralded call. I met her again by chance on 13 November
in the lobby of the Riviera Hotel where she and British businessmen
whom I was visiting are staying. The sympathetic curiosity shown
by REGIN and me on the respective occasions was sufficient to get
her talking about the purpose of her visit. At the same time REGIN
and I both made favourable comments on certain aspects of Cuban
development and this seemed to win her confidence. Her evident
capacity for self-delusion appears to enable her to suppose that
other observers of the Cuban scene (except those possibly working
for the CIA whom she hopes to uncover) share her partiality towards
the Cuban system. I did not, of course, disillusion her in my case,
and, although challenging some of her more outrageous remarks,
left her with the impression of a favourable view of Cuba. She is,
however, self-opinionated, intellectually obstinate and quite
incapable of objectivity when discussing Cuba. She seems keen for
a further meeting (no doubt as a stepping stone to the foreign
community she wishes to penetrate) and I suspect is prepared to
use her feminine charms along the way.
3.
Apart from traces I should welcome your comments. Since she
will presumably be meeting DSE and DGI officials I would obviously
have to be circumspect about any further encounter with her, but
you may consider this a good opportunity to try and pick up
whatever details she may reveal unguardedly about Cuban counter-
:intelligence operations.
um
Nate that syile waking
with letter for Nat'l urity
Studies at the time she in
Culed in lonelin
In 20074 - CNSS had just
Sponsored a 2-dan
ontilovest detion in Sep 14,
CNSS had just recently famil
prin to the conference onlin
and one
Phi Asee

