1000000
104-10534-10044
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DB MEMO 76585
3 January 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, WE/2
ATTENTION: Mr. Charles P. Kiteley
SUBJECT: Technical Analysis of Letter and Envelope -
DB CASE 4361
REFERENCE: WE/2 Memo dated 13 December 1963
1. In response to referenced request, an original typewritten
letter and envelope addressed to the American Embassy, Stockholm,
were examined in order to determine the origin of the letter and the
nationality of the writer.
2. The following conclusions were drawn concerning the letter
and envelope:
a. The typewriter in question is equipped with an obsolete
style of German-made type which, according to our references, was
fitted on a number of typewriters made in Germany during the 1920s
and early 1930s. The possible makes would be Stoewer, Torpedo,
Mercedes, Rheinmetall, Urania, Orga, a, Fortuna, Continental, Kappel,
Groma, Triumph, Merz and possibly some others. Of these makes,
the Torpedo, Mercedes, Rheinmetall and Triumph were probably the
most widely distributed.
b. The machine in question is equipped with a black and red
ribbon. The keyboard is very probably Swedish, as shown by two
characters are adjacent on the standard Swedish keyboard, but not
on the German. (The umlaut-u was not used in the street address,
strike-overs: umlaut-u for hyphen and "s" for "a". These
"Strandvagen" (where the dots should have been placed over the
second "a"). This might be either a simple oversight or an attempt
to conceal the writer's familiarity with the correct spelling.
c. The paper of the letter is of the international standard
(DIN) size "A4" which is almost universally used in Sweden. The
linen-textured stationery appears to be rather common in Sweden.
The two smaller pieces of blank paper match the letter paper with
respect to width, thickness, color, texture and lock-through, and
were probably cut from another sheet of the same type. The envelope
matches specimens of Swedish envelopes taken from DB/5-Postal
Intelligence files.
13-00000
DB Memo #6585 - Page 2
d. The letter was posted from the Stockholm Ban post office,
which is located in the central railway terminal in Stockholm.
All mail deposited in street mail boxes in this area or in the post
office would be processed through this station.
e. The cancellation cachet on the envelope is identical in
all respects (format, postmark, number style and length of killer
bars) to exemplars available in our office.
f. The postage is correct for Swedish internal mail and the
postage stamp is of current issue.
g. A possible irregularity is the time lag between the internal
date of the letter, the date of the postmark and the date of receipt
in the American Embassy. The total time from the internal date of
the letter to the time of receipt is eight days, the time between
the date of posting and the date of receipt is more than three days.
This transit time of more than three days for intra-city mail appears
irregular when compared with the average transit time of only two-
three days for arrival between Stockholm and the United States.
3. The text of the letter warrants some comments because a number
of peculiarities were noted - aside from some spelling or typing errors -
which seem to indicate a Swedish writer. The following words represent
either Swedish spelling or modification: "reserv", "established", "murdered",
"Krustjev". Other examples of Swedish grammar and syntax would be:
"must" (as past tense), "in Soulart" (Swedish form but not spelling),
"he was spy" (without indefinite article), "FBI, USA" (without definite
article), "should" (rather than "would"), "outsmuggled" (Swedish past
participle form), and "whole the world" (pure Swedish form).
4. Another significant detail is the name given, "Ryo Liang Yuan".
"Ryo" is not a standard spelling in any known Romanization system used
for Chinese. "R" is seen in the new Chinese Communist national system,
but never in combination with "yo". "Ryo" is a Japanese spelling. In
the name given it is not known whether the Chinese or Western presenta-
tion is used, in other words, whether "Ryo" or "Yuan" is meant to be
the surname. Among Chinese syllables which could be represented by the
Japanese "Ryo" are Liao, Liang and Laung. Of these Lang (TC:7893) and
Liang (0:2733) are used as surnames. In either case, "Ryo" is hardly
a name by which a real Chinese would identify himself.
5. In summary, and based on the above information, it is concluded
that the letter was transmitted via normal Swedish postal channels. The
letter is probably a "crank letter", most likely written by a Swede,
using a Swedish-keyboard typewriter and Swedish stationery.
13-00000
DB Memo #6585 - Page 3
6. For further information concerning the typewriter and paper
analyses, and the Swedish style of language usage, contact Mr. Jan
Beck on x2009. For further information on the spelling of the
ostensible writer's name, you may contact Mr. Gerald Worth on x2608.
For further information regarding the postal aspects of this case,
please contact Mr. Robert H. Banks on x2303.
7. The original letter and envelope are being returned herewith.
ALBIN R. TRECIOKAS
Chief, TSD/DB
Attachments (1)
As stated
Distribution:
Orig & 1 - Addressee
1 - TSD/GARB/A&R
1 - TSD/DB/3
1 - DB files
1 - PI chrono
1 - Case 4361
TSD/DB/5-PI/RHBanks/x2303/ery
SECRET