1000000
104-10312-10192
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
hie p. 4
and TAB IS
re statements
to Rankin
abaux n'a
bona fides &
Oswald care
•* Tabs I & J
attached.
*
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1999
NOTE: Pg. 6 excerpt (pertaining to Warren Commission/Oswald)
is taken from a 7 November 1966 memorandum written by
David Murphy to the General Counsel, Subject: Yuriy Ivanovich
NOSENKO, routed through Chief, CI Staff (w/carbon copy to
DDP).
The original document, and its attachments (Tabs A thru N)
is located in file entitled "General Counsel SB Discussions
on Legal Aspects of Case."
only
--
A Xerox copy/of the covering memo is contained in the Pertinent
Documents (to the Study "The Monster Plot") file drawer.
13-00000
7 November 1966
MEMORANDUM FOR: General Counsel
SUBJECT
: Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
Summary
1. The Director has requested that there be con-
ducted immediately an exhaustive examination regarding
the possibility of damaging publicity and embarrassment
to the Agency should it become public knowledge that we
have held Subject incommunicado for over two years. This
memorandum seeks an advisory opinion from the General Coun-
sel on the Agency's legal basis for its handling of Sub-
ject to date, on the position that could best be assumed
if the Agency were called upon to defend its handling of
Subject, and on legal aspects of Subject's eventual dis-
posal.
Background
2. Subject voluntarily established contact with CIA
representatives in Geneva in 1962. He identified himself
as a staff officer of the KGB's Internal Security Direc-
torate and offered to sell counterintelligence information.
This offer was accepted and he was recruited as an agent
in place and debriefed on counterintelligence matters dur-
ing five meetings in Geneva. He then returned to the
USSR. He came to Geneva again in January 1964 as the
security officer for the Soviet disarmament delegation.
After a number of meetings with his CIA handlers he de-
fected on 4 February 1964 and was secretly taken to Frank-
furt, Cermany, crossing the Swiss-German worder on the
night of 4/5 February with alias U.S. Army identity docu-
ments. In Geneva and again upon arrival in Frankfurt,
Subject wrote out an asylum request, requesting political
asylum from the U.S. Covernment (see Tab A).
3. Because serious doubts about Subject's bona fides
had arisen on the basis of the information he had pro-
vided both in 1962 and in the meetings in Geneva in 1964,
it was originally planned to do a detailed bona fides de-
briefing and assessment in Cermany before making any
13-00000
:
2.
decision about moving Subject to the United States.
How-
ever, unprecedented action by the Soviet Government in
respect to the defection of one of its citizens forced
a change of plans. On 9 February, unidentified Soviet
sources in Geneva leaked the news to the press that Sub-
ject, described as an "expert attached to the Soviet Dele-
gation to the Disarmament Conference" had disappeared,
and that it was presumed that he had defected. Because
of mounting pressure from the press, which included much
speculation that Subject was a high level scientist or
disarmament expert, it was decided that the State Depart-
ment would make a brief announcement acknowledging Subject's
request for asylum in the U.S. and identifying him as a
member of the KGB. This was done on lû February (see Tab
B). On 11 February, the Soviet Government delivered a
note to the American Embassy in Moscow asking how Subject
left Switzerland and requesting an immediate interview
with him and his release. On 12 February, Soviet Ambassa-
dor to the Disarmament Conference TSARAPRIN held a press
conference in Geneva in which he accused the Swiss Govern-
ment of failure to cooperate in locating Subject. Although
the Swiss categorically rejected these charges, the Ameri-
can Ambassador to Switzerland recommended that Swiss
authorities be allowed to interview Subject to convince
themselves that Subject had left Switzerland of his own
free will.
4.
On 12 February, on the instructions of the Direc-
tor, Subject was brought to the United States. Se travelled
by commercial air, again using alias U.S. Army identifica-
tion, and was admitted to the country at New York City
(in true name) on parole under the provisions of Section
212 (d) (5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (see
Tab C).
5. On 13 February, representatives of the Swiss and
Soviet Embassies in Washington advised the State Depart-
ment that they desired interviews with Subject. On 14 Febru-
ary, in Noscow, Soviet Foreign Minister GROMYKO called in
Ambassador KOHLER and protested "impermissable activities"
on the part of the U.S. in Subject's case. Soviet press
spokesmen took an even harder line to Western correspond-
ents, and accused the U.S. of kidnapping Subject. On the
afternoon of 14 February, at two separate interviews,.
Subject spoke first to Swiss Embassy and then to Soviet
Embassy representatives (see Tab D). At these interviews,
which were also attended by State Department and INS
13-00000
3.
officials, Subject confirmed that he left Switzerland of
his own free will to seek asylum in the U.S. In addition,
Subject replied to questions of the Soviet Embassy repre-
sentative to the effect that he was renouncing his Soviet
citizenship. On the evening of 14 February, the U.S.
State Department made a brief formal reply to the Soviet
protest, then issued a brief statement to the press noting
that the interviews had been held and that Subject had
confirmed his desire to remain in this country.
6. From the time of his arrival to 4 April 1964,
Subject was housed in an Agency safehouse in the Washing-
ton area. During this period, regular systematic debrief-
ing was commenced, and Subject was made available to
representatives of the FBI for debriefing on matters affect-
ing their responsibilities. Although allowed out for
evening and week-end excursions, Subject was at all times
accompanied by O/S personnel. In addition, Subject took
a two-week vacation to Hawaii, again accompanied by case
officers and security guards,
that Subject was a KGB plant, and at the same time it be-
came obvious that it would be impossible to proceed fur-
ther to resolve the many suspicious points and contradictions
that had arisen without changing the conditions in which
Subject was being held. Subject was growing increasingly
uncooperative, especially when sensitive areas were touched
upon, and constantly pressed for the legalization of his
status in the U.S. and the issuance of an alien registra-
tion card. At the same time, Subject's heavy drinking
and other unruly personal habits were causing increasing
difficulties to the security personnel charged with keep-
ing him under control and out of trouble at all times, and
it was clear that it was only a matter of time before he
created a public scandal. More important, he was in a
position to communicate with the KGB since physical control
could not be absolute.
7. On 4 April 1954 Subject voluntarily underwent a
polygraph examination. The results of this examination
indicated deception on a number of critical points indi-
cating that he was sent out by the KGB to perform one or
more missions which also involved his penetration of the
Agency and its operations. It was decided, therefore,
that the physical circumstances of Subject's stay in this
country would have to be drastically changed if the Agency
were to carry out is counterintelligence responsibilities
and adhere to the terms of the parole agreement. As a
result, Subject was moved to quarters where his movements
13-00000
4.
could be more easily controlled, and his outing privileges
were suspended, pending resolution of bona fides. He has
remained in this status to the present time,
The
8. It is worth noting that had we not taken the above
action but accepted Subject at face value, it is quite pos-
sible that we would have proceeded with a series of opera-
tional actions on the basis of Subject's information.
results of some of these actions could have been very em-
barrassing to the U.S. Government politically and damaging
to U.S. national security. For example, Subject's chief
operational proposal at the time, one that he was most
insistent we should proceed with immediately, involved the
sexual compromise of Vladimir Pavlovich SUSLOV, the most
senior Soviet official in the United Nations Secretariat,
holding the position of Undersecretary in Charge of Poli-
tical and Security Council Affairs.
Bona Fides
9. Since April 1964, hundreds of hours have been
devoted to interrogations of Subject (in which he has
willingly cooperated) and a great deal of time has been
spent on exhaustive collateral investigations. We con-
clude that it has been established beyond reasonable doubt
that Subject is a KGB agent who established contact with
CIA and subsequently defected on KGB instructions, and
that he came to the United States on a deception mission..
The implications of this mission have a grave and direct
bearing on U.S. national security. Although our findings
are supported by the results of two polygraph examinations
(assecond one has just been administered), we must note
that the nature of the evidence is inadmissable in a
court of law. In any case, it is clear that Subject has
not been in a position to perform any overt act of trans-
gression of U.S. espionage laws since 4 April 1964 when
he was placed in a restricted area and deprived of any
conceivable means of communication with the KGB.
10. Subject does not admit that he defected on KGB
He
orders or that he came to the U.S. on a KGB mission.
has admitted, however, that he made numerous lies about
his personal history and about the details of his KGB
service to U.S. officials, both before and after arriving
in the United States. (A translation of a handwritten
statement by Subject about these lies is attached as Tab E.)
Coordination with Other U.S. Government Agencies
11. USID Members. In accordance with the DDCI'S
ruling relating to a defector who has been a member of
13-00000
5.
a hostile intelligence service. Subject's status and
handling was discussed at an executive session of USIB
and decided on an ad hoc basis, NOSENKO defected on
4 February, and the Secretary of State, the Attorney
General, the Special Assistant to the President on National
Security Affairs, McGeorge Bundy, General Carroll, Direc-
tor of the Defense Intelligence Agency and the FBI were
all notified immediately. On 5 February, General Carter
reported the defection to an executive session of USIB
and followed this up with formal statements to USIB men-
bers on 1l and 19 February (see Tab F), which stated that
Subject's bona fides had not yet been established.
was agreed that no DS number would be issued to Subject,
and that he would be handled on a special basis by this
Agency. In fact, normal USIB interest in Subject аз а
defector dropped off drastically as it became quickly
apparent that he had no positive intelligence interest
of value to any part of the community.
It
12. The President was informed of the full extent
of our suspicions about Subject's bona fides by the then
Director, Mr. McCone, on 11 February 1964. Mr. Patrick
Coyne, Executive Secretary of the PFIAB, was given a simi-
lar briefing by Mr. Helms on 19 February 1964.
13. Generals Carroll and Fitch of DIR were also sub-
sequently informed of the problems about Subject's bona
fides (see Tab G).
14. The Secretary of State, Ambassador Thompson,
and other senior officials in the Department of State
were informed of our reservations about Subject's bona
fides and our fears that he might be a dispatched KGB
agent. In discussions about the possibility of Subject's
eventual deportation, the Secretary of State expressed
serious concern about the adverse reaction that such a
move might have on other potential defectors (sce Tab H).
15. The Director of Security, State Department, was
We
informed of the bona fides problem at an early date.
have worked closely with this Office since then on the
problem of evaluating the significance of Subject's in-
formation as it affects the security interests of the
State Department.
16. The problem of Subject's bona fides took on
particular significance and urgency in respect to the
13-00000
6.
work of the Warren Commission. According to Subject's
story, he had been in the KGB line of responsibility for
Lee Harvey Oswald while Oswald was in the Soviet Union,
and after the assassination of President Kennedy, Subject
participated in an investigation of Oswald's activities
in the USSR. In the course of his official duties, he
alleges that he had read Oswald's dossier. Subject was
therefore in a position to vouch for the fact that the
KCB had never had any interest in Oswald, considered him
to be "abnormal" and were delighted to get rid of him.
(For good measure, Subject threw in a story about Oswald's
being a poor shot.) As Mr. Rankin, the Chief Counsel of
the Warren Commission commented, if Subject's story could
be accepted at face value the Commission could easily
terminate its work sooner than it had expected. Rankin
was informed therefore that there were aspects of Subject's
information that caused us grave concern and that we were
not able to say that his information on Oswald should be
accepted uncritically (see Tab I).
17. Because so much of Subject's information affected
U.S. internal security matters for which the FBI bears
primary responsibility, and because of the possibility
that Subject was a KCB plant has a direct bearing on the
validity of certain FBI operations, the FBI has been kept
fully informed on our views about Subject's bona fides
and our progress in interrogating and investigating him
from the moment of his defection to the present time.
Thus, C/CI informed the FBI liaison officer about our
reservations on Subject's bona fides as early as 5 Febru-
ary 1964: the Director of the FBI and his deputy for
Internal Security, William Sullivan, have been kept com-
pletely up to date ever since, and we have coordinated
all major aspects of our handling of Subject with them.
After a long meeting with Sullivan and other FBI repre-
sentatives to review Subject's case on 1 April 1964, the
FBI interposed no objections to our proposal to restrict
Subject's movements and commence hostile interrogation
(see Tab J). Subsequently, the FBI has formally agreed
with our findings on Subject, at least to the extent that
"On considering carefully the results of your interroga-
tions of Yuri NOSENKO and your analysis of his statements
and activities, it does appear he is not what he purports
to be. While this Bureau is not in a position to draw
any conclusion in this case, we do recognize it is possi-
ble that NOSENKO could be a Soviet plant or agent provoca-
teur." (See Tab Κ.)
13-00000
7.
13. The then Acting Attorney General Hr. Nicholas
Katzenbach (and several members of his staff) were apprised
of our reservations about Subject on 2 April 1954 and an
opinion was sought from him both as to interpretation of
the exclusion and parole agreement, and as to how we should
proceed in the event that it proved necessary to deport
Subject from this country. Pertinent memoranda are attached
as Tab L.
Queries from Congressmen, the Press, and the Public
19. There have been several queries from congress-
men about Subject's status and whereabouts, and from the
press about the possibility of interviewing Subject. The
general formula that was worked out to answer such requests,
adapted as necessary to fit the specific request, runs as
follows:
"Yuriy Nosenko requested asylum in the United States
The
in February 1964. His request was granted.
information Mr. Nosenko is providing is regularly
made available to appropriate agencies of the
Government. However, publicizing this information
and its source could only increase the possibility
of Soviet reprisal against Mr. Nosenko and others
who may seek asylum in the Free World."
Several specific examples are attached as Tab M.
Efforts to Keep the KGB from Learning of Our Awareness of
Subject's True Status
Con-
20. From the time we learned that Subject had been
sent to this country on a KGB mission it was obvious that
if we were to have the time to analyze and resolve this
case, and to plan and execute appropriate countermeasures,
it was essential that we attempt to keep the KGB from
learning of our awareness of Subject's true status.
sequently, detailed knowledge of the depth and scope of
our suspicions about Subject, and the implications thereof,
has been restricted to a very few people in the Agency
and the intelligence community. Nonetheless, as can be
seen from paragraphs 11 to 18 above, we did advise key
policy echelons and principals in the intelligence com-
munity, even though this carried the inevitable risk of
leakage. As you can see from Tab H, we have not disclosed
our suspicions about Subject in our responses to press and
congressmen. Even in our formal correspondence to the
PFIAB, for example, the most we have said is that "Sub-
ject's bona fides has not been established" (see Tab F),
13-00000
8.
Soviet Inspired Inquiries
21. In 1966 there have been several indications
that the Soviets are making a serious effort to find out
what has happened to Subject and to force him to the sur-
face. The most blatant and unusual of these is the
approach by a Soviet journalist, Yuriy KOROLEV (a known
KCB agent), to the French magazine Paris Hatch with an
offer to provide photographs and materials for an exclu-
sive story of Subject and his family. According to
KOROLEV, Subject's wife is considering an approach to an
international juridical organization in an effort to ob-
tain compensation from Subject for damages caused by his
abandonment of her and her children. In responding to
this approach through an official French service, we have
quoted a statement, purporting to be from Subject himself,
to the effect that Subject considers this approach to
represent blatant and cruel manipulation of his family by
the KGB and that he will not lend himself to the scheme
by agreeing to an interview or in any other way.
Subject's Status
22. To recapitulate, Subject entered the United
States on 12 February 1964 on parole to the Agency under
the provisions of Section 212 (d) (5) of the Immigration
and Nationality Act. As we understand it, parole re-
sponsibility is delegated to the Agency by the Attorney
General and the DCI on 10 February 1955, which states:
"After parole of such aliens, the Central Intel-
ligence Agency will assume responsibility for care,
supervision and control of a kind and degree it
believes consistent with the internal security
needs of the United States during continuance of
their parole status."
In accordance with our understanding of this agreement,
and because we have reason to believe that Subject is a
conscious and willing agent of a hostile intelligence
service, we have seen to it that Subject was under our
direct observation and control at all times from the
moment of his arrival in the United States. From 12 Febru-
ary to 4 April 1964 it was possible to keep Subject at a
location where he could enjoy a certain amount of movement
and of contact with the outside world. Since 4 April 1964,
for reasons explained in paragraph 6 of this memorandum,
13-00000
9.
it has been necessary to keep him incommunicado at a loca-
tion which is known to no one outside of the Agency (and
to very few within it). Authorization for Subject to
remain in this country under the Special Agreement Pro-
cedures has been periccically extended by the Immigration
and Naturalization Service. The current extension is good
until 17 February 1967 (see Tab N).
23. Although his freedom of movement has been severely
restricted, Subject has not been maltreated and he has not
made any formal complaint about his treatment. On the
contrary, we have several written statements from him in
the past year in which he states that our handling of him
was justified and even beneficial (see Tab E),
Disposal
24. From the time that Subject was brought to this
country we have thought about the possibility of his event-
ual deportation as a contingency measure. You will recall
talks on this in which you participated in the spring of
1964, at that time we thought that it might be possible
to mitigate the political and propaganda drawbacks of a
forced deportation by announcing that Subject has con-
fessed his true KGB role. With the passage of time. how-
ever, and in view of our much firmer conclusions about
Subject's real role and mission and our clearer understand-
ing of what this implies, it is apparent that great practi-
cal problems stand in the way of his deportation to
either the USSR or a third country.
a.
USSR: Subject has categorically stated on
numerous occasions that he will never contemplate
return to the USSR, and although we suspect that he
might secretly welcome such a move, we would expect
him to act out his part to the end with loud protests
that he was being shipped to his death, etc. When
the possibility of expulsion was discussed with De-
partment of State officials in 1964, both the Secre-
tary of State and Ambassador Thompson expressed
their concern for the adverse effect this might have
on other potential defectors. Forcible repatriation
of political refugees is against long established
U.S. policy, and would be certain to arouse viclent
reaction from ethnic minority groups in the United
States and the congressmen representing them. Under
these circumstances (and we can be sure that the KGB
will do whatever they can to promote the furor), an
13-00000
10.
alleged "confession" by Subject would come under
very close scrutiny. and might backfire very badly.
Another point that has to be considered is the
possibility that the Soviets, again playing their
part, might refuse to accept Subject on the grounds
that he has renounced his Soviet citizenship. The
only location considered so far for turnover to the
Soviets has been Berlin, which was used for the
exchange of Abel-Powers and Lonsdale-Wynne, and for
the transfer of several Soviet defectors who re-
quested return. Subject does not appear to fit
either category. On the other hand, if Subject were
to agree to turnback, there is a real question as to
whether the Soviets would accept him in Berlin as
they did the others in the past. Their current
practice is to handle repatriation of Soviet citizens
through the Soviet Embassy in Bonn. Finally, if
Subject were accepted by the Soviets on the basis of
forced repatriation, the Soviets might carry through
the charade, try Subject as a traitor, and give wide
publicity to statements by him about his "maltreat-
ment by CIA, etc.
::
b. Third Country: Although we believe it
likely that Subject would accede to deportation to
a third country, there is certainly no country in
the free world on which we could conceivably try to
unload Subject without first informing them of his
true status. Even if we considered this a desir-
able objective (and we do not), it seems certain
that the Department of State would veto such a piece
of inter-governmental duplicity on the basis of the
political risks involved. By the same token, it
appears very unlikely that any country would agree
to accept this dangerous and troublesome Soviet
agent if they knew what they were getting. Finally,
even if we were somehow able to induce another coun-
try to take Subject off our hands, it is obvious
that at best we would have succeeded in exchanging a
short term, latent problem for actual and persistent
ones. Once legalized in the West, with his movements
uncontrolled and with free communication with his
KGB superiors, Subject would have tremendous opportuni-
ties for creating adverse publicity to the Agency
and creating other serious trouble without ever con-
travening the laws of the country in which he re-
sided. We cannot even exclude the possibility that
13-00000
11.
Subject might be able to convince a liaison security
or intelligence service that he is genuine: in such
a case, the possibilities of trouble and embarrass-
ment are almost limitless.
25. Regardless of where Subject is deported to,
several factors must be considered. Would it be necessary
to serve Subject with a formal warrant of deportation?
If so, would he have the right to demand and receive coun-
sel?
Alternative Course of Action
26. Given sufficient time we believe that we coulä
persuade Subject to confess. Although there have been
certain recent signs of erosion in his ability to stick
to his story, and perhaps even in his will to resist, we
cannot estimate how long a period of time might be re-
quired, but we do not believe that he is prepared to hold
cut forever. Once Subject confessed, we estimate that we
would require approximately a year in which to debrief
him, because it would be primarily from minute examination
of the details of how and when he was trained and briefed
by the KGB that we would expect to obtain a better reading
on the true nature and extent of KGB penetration of U.S.
intelligence agencies and activities. During that period
we would still wish to maintain the present circumstances
of handling Subject, and would continue to respond to out-
side inquiries to the effect that Subject fears for his
life, doesn't wish to be interviewed, etc. Upon conclu-
sion of this debriefing period--and depending on our esti-
mate of the sincerity and completeness of Subject's
confession--we would then be prepared to provide Subject
a new identity and an opportunity to settle in the U.S.
or elsewhere.
27. Finally as can be seen from the summary in para-
graphs 10-17 above, and from the material attached in
the tabs, we have coordinated every significant aspect
of Subject's handling with the other U.S. Government agen-
cies who have a direct stake in one or another aspect
of Subject's case. Specifically, we would not contemplate
proceeding with any specific plan to dispose of Subject
without coordinating this with the Department of State,
the Department of Justice and the FBI.
28. We would like the General Counsel's comments
with particular respect to any gaps he may detest in any
aspects of the Agency's legal position on Subject's case,
13-00000
12.
suggestions for improving this position, and, specifically,
his views on whether the authority for parole granted to
the Director in 1955 has been validated or updated by
succeeding Administrations or by legislation. We suggest
that the General Counsel's review specifically include
identification of possible legal actions which the wife
or anyone else could initiate in federal or state courts,
probable legal and publicity consequences of any such action,
and determination of legal defenses and ways of handling
publicity. In reviewing this case and preparing an opinion
it is requested that the case not be discussed with anyone
outside the Agency.
Attachments
Tab A thru N
/s/ David E. Murphy
David E. Murphy
Chief, SB Division
TOP SECRET
EYES ONLY