14-00000
104-10174-10045
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
13 January 1960
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Cuba TDY - Edward G. Tichborn (P)-
23
1. On 12 January and 13 January I talked with (Phil Toomey) and
Bob Reynonds of WH Division to firm up details re Tichborn's briefing here
on 15 January and re preparations for his trip to Cuba.
2. Re the briefing, it was decided that: (1) Mr. (Reynolds will give
Subject a general briefing on the Cuban political situation (the major one
will be undertaken by the Station) and (2) Subject will be given sanitized
copies of the Perlongo (?) report (on India, Section IV, and of the report
prepared by the Plans Branch/PP/PRD entitled "Target Study of Opposition
Groups in Cuba" to be read by Subject while at the briefing and then returned
to us. Some observations on security will probably also be made at this
time in addition to instructions on the manner of keeping and submitting his
financial accounting. (It should be mentioned here also that WH Finance/Admin
(Mr. (Sousane) is of the opinion that since Tichborn will return to Washington
in about 2 weeks time, it is not necessary for him to submit his accounts
my mail, since that can be taken care of on his return.)
3. The problem which seemed to need most careful consideration was
that of his cover while in Cuba. In talking to operational contacts he
makes there, the cover story suggested by the Station in IN-47609 of 12 Nov.
1959 appears adequate. However, according to Pan American Airways, upon
arrival in Havana the visitor is issued a tourist card by the Cuban
Immigration authorities. One must state his profession at this time, which
should present no problem to Tichborn. It could be that one is also asked
his reason for being in Cuba. In this case, WH has suggested that the
answer of "tourist" would be best since less suspicion would be placed on
Subject in the beginning. The important aspect, however, appears to be
that of covering Tichborn as well as possible in the event that he runs
afoul of the Cuban authorities due to the nature of his activities and his
contacts. I brought this matter up with WH and they agreed that some kind
of backstopping might be a good idea. As a result, I contacted Mr. Strange
of Cover Division who assured me that, if necessary, an appropriate letter
could be provided Tichborn from a cover company. The one finally decided
upon as the most logical was the (California branch) of the cover company (in 24
Philadelphia which a which had originally been provided for funding Tichborn.
Mr. Strange suggested that if this procedure be followed, Subject should
then be given the name of the branch office rather than the one in
Philadelphia. Mr. (Toomey) suggested the wording of such a letter (the basic
idea of which would be for Subject to combine business with pleasure) which
I will write up (if agreed upon by AC/PAD/FP) in final draft, and Cover
Division will then transfer it to the appropriate letterhead. However, I
advised both Mr. (Toomey) and Mr. Strange that before going into this matter
further, I would have to check this whole matter out with you on 14 January.
4. As far as financing is concerned, Mr. (Sousane) of WH is taking care
of this matter and as of 13 January, the request for the advance ($2,000)
has been approved. The request for one-half of Tichborn's salary ($650)
must await approval until Subject has signed the amendment to his contract
(which was received by this office on today's date). As per your suggestion,
Mr. Strange has agreed to provide payment of Tichborn by a check drawn
on the cover company to be deposited with Subject's bank. (I guess the
final decision on this will depend on how Subject wants the money, whether
a bank deposit or cash.) If done through the cover company and sent to
Tichborn's bank, we should allow at least four or five days for the
deposit to be made, depending upon the speed of the postal system.
Evalena Vidal
PP/PAD
3/1/71