1000000
104-10331-10142
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
1
Drebate.arc
11 February 1997
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
FROM: Gary M. Breneman, IC
SUBJECT:
Comparison of ARRB and DO Memoranda re
Treatment of CIA Officer Names in JFK
Collection
1. This memorandum is in response to an assignment to
compare a 20 March 1996 ARRB memorandum written by T. Jeremy
Gunn and The Directorate of Operations response dated 20
July 1966, authored by Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr. Both deal
with the treatment of CIA officer true names which appear in
the JFK collection when they will be postponed and when
they will be released.
2. First the ARRB Memorandum
Gunn describes in legal
terms the Board's position on the postponement or release of
CIA officers' true names. He makes a proffer which states
that there is a presumption in favor of release akin to a
legal evidentuary rule which causes a burden to shift to the
other party (CIA) to prove something. In this instance, it
is factual evidence/proof sufficient to shift the burden not
only back to neutral but to the other side of neutral which
permits postponement.
3. The Gunn memorandum then sets out the criteria
required to meet the burden under several situations.
13-00000
A. For officers who are still alive he states that the
proofs required to postpone release of a name are three in
number and all three must be met:
i. The officer must be living outside of the U.S.
OR,
(R)easonably be expected to travel outside of
the U.S. in the foreseeable future;
AND,
ii. The officer is either working
(presumably
a current staff officer, contract employee,
or independent contractor)
under cover;
AND,
or is retired
iii. The officer objects to the release of his or
her true name.
COMMENT:
Mr. Gunn's criteria are a little confusing
and reach beyond the Board's authority. First, note again
that the three elements are joined by an AND
meaning all
elements must be met to satisfy a postponement. Second, the
first requirement of living or traveling outside of the U.S.
is not tied to cover. Many officers who do not work
under cover all of the time are, in fact, provided cover
for overseas TDY's. Thus, any officer who might
reasonably' be expected to travel outside of the U.S.
would warrant postponement of his true name. This would
13-00000
seem to include every CIA employee, contract employee and
independent contractor past and present.
With respect to the third element, Mr. Gunn and the
Board are simply in error. To my knowledge they have no
authority to require that an individual be consulted
concerning his or her wishes to maintain cover, thus having
his or her true name postponed, or to give up his cover,
thus having the name released. This decision does not lie
in the first instance with the individual but is an
institutional decision which lies solely within the purview
of the Agency and the executive branch of the government.
CIA as an executive agency charged with the creation,
maintenance, and dissolution of cover mechanisms is the only
entity competent to make such a decision. It alone knows if
release of an officer's true name will compromise an
existing cover mechanism which will, in turn, expose others
who share or have shared the same cover. It alone knows if
release of an officer's name will expose CIA sponsorship (a
cover entity) of a sensitive activity. It alone knows if
release of an officer's name will violate a promise of
confidentiality to a commercial cover sponsor which could
cause both embarrassment and possibly, financial hardship to
the sponsor and, in turn, substantially hinder the Agency's
ability to secure subsequent commercial cover sponsors.
Turning next to the wishes of a particular officer
(either current or retired) vis a vis staying with his or
her cover, these thoughts come to mind. For current
13-00000
employees, the decision is again not entirely theirs. If,
after careful review, the Agency does not have a strong
position on the employee maintaining the cover, the officer
should be permitted to decide. He or she should be
counseled however, that an action to remove cover could have
an adverse impact on future assignments or TDYs. With
respect to retirees, if, after careful review, the Agency
does not object to the removal from cover, the individual
should be permitted to decide. Note, that the responses to
this inquiry will be mixed.
As a historical note, the
Agency over the years has been on an ever-swinging pendulum
with respect to cover into retirement, ✗ ✗ cover for
life, etc. There will be officers who petitioned hard
unsuccessfully to have their cover removed when they retired
and will gladly consent to lifting the cover. There will be
those officers who do not want their cover lifted under any
circumstance.
By way of summary, it is CIA not the Board and not the
individual officer who makes the initial decision concerning
the maintenance or lifting of cover.
B. Former officers, status unknown. While the
heading to this section would seem to suggest the CIA does
not know the cover/non-cover status of some of its former
officers, the section does not rally deal with this issue.
Rather, within the section, Mr. Gunn simply recognizes the
fact the CIA may not be able to find all of its former
officers to ask if they want to be opened up or remain under
13-00000
cover. The test required by Mr. Gunn to satisfy the Board
and thus continue postponement until 1 June of this year is
a good faith showing that reasonable attempts were made
to locate the officer and failed.
The section contains the additional provision which
advises the Board may continue a postponement beyond 1 June
of this year (i.e., until 2010) if the CIA provides the
board with evidence which satisfies the criteria of either
category 1 or category 3. Such additional evidence must
be provided by 1 May 1977.
The requirements or tests of this section for the
Agency are not onerous but should be set-out as a series of
uniform actions or check-off's taken in the attempt to
locate each current status unknown officer. The record
of these actions could then be presented to the ARRB in
support of a request for continued to postponement. The DO
Memorandum mentions of the possibility of asking the IRS or
the OPM for assistance in this regard and this should
probably be done. I recall however, that the Service will
assist, through cleared contacts at the National Office, but
only to the extent of determining the whereabouts of the
individual and then contacting him and ask that he be in
touch with his former employer. I have no current knowledge
of cleared contacts at the OPM but they existed in the past
and I assume they continue.
c. Names having effect on current intelligence
interests. The Gunn letter appears to subscribe a higher
13-00000
level of concern to this section and its criteria than the
previous two, not recognizing the plain fact that the
criteria of all three sections are inextricable.
It sets
out four separate criteria which, if CIA satisfies its
burden, i.e. provides sufficient evidence to prove any one
of them, will operate to postpone a true name until the year
2010. Note again, the criteria required are four separate
ones, each separated by a comma and between numbers 3 and 4
and "OR." They are:
i.
The officer must be currently engaged in
clandestine activities; OR,
ii. The release of the officer's name would
compromise ongoing intelligence operations or operations
with current intelligence value (presumably, the latter
permits a review into the officer's past activities, agent
relationships, and cover positions); OR,
iii. The release of the officer's true rame would
reasonably be expected to cause significant harm to a living
person (including family members); (read broadly, this
provision would include, the individual, former agents,
anyone who shared the same cover or cover position, i.e. a
dedicated Department of State slot within an embassy); OR,
iv. The release of the officer's name would cause a
significant harm to the national security or the foreign
relations of the U.S. (a criteria which is broad enough to
drive the proverbial Mack truck through).
13-00000
4. In Part II, the Gunn memorandum takes back part of
what it gave in the previous section. It
:
sets up a test of
importance to the assassination story vs. evidence of
harm.
Essentially, it advises that the Board will weigh
the CIA's evidence but, if within its view, the true name
being considered for postponement is important to the
assassination story, the Board will release it. This means
important
to the story, truly substantial evidence must be brought
for those few individuals who may be viewed as
to bear. Absent such evidence, the Board will release, and
the only recourse left to the Agency would be an appeal to
the President.
5. The Directorate of Operations Memorandum. The
basic concern with the steps for handling names as contained
within the memorandum is as follows. For officers who
retired under cover, the first step will be to contact them
and ask if they want their true name released. Per the
comments on page three supra, this should be the last step
of the review, not the first.
A. Other Comments. The resources and data bases
which will be researched for each name should be clearly
established and followed in a uniform manner. Deviation
from a set, orderly process will open CIA determinations to
criticism, objections and dismissal, i.e. release of a name
that should be postponed.
B. In addition to the data bases described
retirement records, annuity pay records, the office of
13-00000
security, insurance lists
consideration might be given
to the Northwest Federal Credit Union, and overt data bases
such as Phonedec. Like the IRS and OPM, the credit union
might not be able from a legal standpoint to provide an
address. However, it would probably be prepared to contact
an individual and ask that he be in touch.
c. A comment must be made about the idea of
universally releasing the true names of overt employees.
To
the extent that any current employee, even overt employee,
may be sent overseas on TDY under light cover, the release
of his or her true name via these JFK documents which will
receive widespread review could jeopardize his overseas
mission and possibly, place his life in danger.
6. These thoughts are intended to be talking points as
we commence to sort out the manner in which we will deal
with the true names.
Clearly, we need to begin to quickly
identify those names which can be released, those on which
there is some question, and those few on which we really
need to dig in our heals.
6. I would be glad to discuss with you any of the
issues raised herein.
Gary M. Breneman

