14-00000
104-10177-10212
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
NOTE in the absence of comments or indication of action
taken, this cover sheet will be destroyed when the
document is filed.
FROM:
RID/
TO
ROOM
NO.
DATE
OFFICERS
INITIALS
RECEIVED FORWARDED
WH 0.6 Barton
2.
]
ث
COMMENTS
29/19 W.T.
い
Aiene apatt
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
.3/0
3.
21-72
4.
21-7 cyfa
6.
WH/Carib
Cami/Po
7.
8.
Mis
A
9.
•Casitar
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
11/
17.
18.
19.
20. RID/FI
14001
וד
fpvc increw.
ROTUOR DO
FILE NUMBょく
ENCLOSURE
ABSTRACT
INDEX
DATE MICROFILMED
COCUMENT CATS
14
458
6:08
USS MEVIOUS
101TIONS
SECRET
DOCMENT SUMBER
22
MPA09838
(40)
)
)
1
1
30
14-00000
{
TO
NPO
DISPATCH
Chief, Wil Division
Chief of Station, Habana
FROM
Chief of Station, Panama City
SUBANT
SECRET
Activities of Juan Emilio HUNEZ Portuondo, Cuban
Exile and Opposition Leader
None; for information
REFERENCEN
раки SMACE AND NO
22
THZPA-2038 9938
ADQUARTERS Falno
19-500
DATE
X
10:17 15:59
3-(CHECA "X" ONE)
MARKED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
INDEXING CAN BE JUDGED
BY QUALIFIED HQ. DESK ONLY
Ja
2.1-456671.c. Cuda
1. Juan BailiUNEZ Portuondo, Cuban politician and diplomat during the
regine of Fulgencio BATISTA, who is now in exile and regarded as a
leader of the opposition to the revolutionary government of Fidel CASTRO
Ruz, came to Panama from Lima on 10 October 1959 and left for Guatemala
on 19 October 1959.
2. The sensationalist press notices (Attachment. A) that appeared in La
Nacion, a Panama City daily tabloid whose oppositionist policies carry
over to pro-CASTRO/Cuban revolution editorial comment and reporting,
constitute the extent of local publicity for NUNEZ Portuondo's visit
here. However, the local ODIBEX intelligence reporting unit acquired,
and reported on 27 October 1959 to its superior office, this office, and
local ODACID, information (Attachment B) attributed directly to NUNEZ
Portuondo.
3. It undoubtedly was NUNEZ Portuondo's sojourn in Panama and his meeting
with government officials that contributed to expressions of concern by
16-7, Station liaison sources over Cuban policy toward Panama. One manifestation
of that concern was a report (Attachment C) that the head of the internal-
external security section of HYFRACE addressed to the Minister of Govern-
ment and Justice.
05
ان
01
16-7
27
4. When HYPOTHESIS-8 passed the Station a copy of his chief's report, he
said that the source of the information was SANCHEZ (fnu) whom he
described as a BATISTA exile living in Panama City; and SANCHEZ source
was a person who travels between Panama and Cuba. When passing the
report, HYPOMIESIS-3 said also that SANCHEZ had a connection with HUNEZ
Portuondo whom the NYFRACE 8rganization regarded as the head of the Cuban
opposition, and that NUNEZ Portuondo had informed President Ernesto DE LA
GUARDIA Jr. and Hector VALDES Ferrabone, Minister of Government and
Justice, that strong action against Panama was being planned in Cuba.
After an initial and several follow-up queries to HYPOTHESIS-8 for identi-
fication of SANCHEZ, HYPOTHESIS-8, after several days of checking, af-
firmed that he had learned that the person in question was Jose SANCHEZ
Ramirez, whom Station records show is a former lieutenant in the Cuban
National Police, who came to Peñama on 19 January 1959 (reported in:
(PACY) 4303).
16-07
16-7
24,01
9 November 1959
Attachments: A,B,C, (as noted)
Distribution:
3-Hiqrs watts. A,B,C.
1-005 Esbana watts. A,B,C.
P-Files v/atts. A,3,C.
203/ves
105 53
!
Juman
Edward G. Bensing
شهرين ارم)
'!
13/RS
PAST
14-00000
22
ATTACHMENT A TO 42179938
Panamá Es Ahora Ahora
La Nación El Centro De La
It
Contrarevolución
:
CONTRA FIDEL CASTRO
Núñez Portuondo Organizó Aquí
El Movimiento Contra F. Castro (14
La ciudad de Panama ha sido escogida como eje a centro de la contrarevolución cubana,
dirigida por el conocido lider batistiano Emilio Núñez Portuondo, según datos logrados y confir-
mados hoy por "La Nación".
El señor Núñez Portuondo, ampliamente conocido en Panamá, donde actuó como Embaja.
dor de Cuba durante varios años, permanecie siete dias como tuésped del Hotel El Panamá, den-
tro del ons riguioso incognito, aunque luvo oportunidad de establecer contacto con cierto sector
de la prensa nacional que nunca ha demostrado sumpatia hacia la revolución del Dr. Fidel Cas
tro en la república antillana.
Personas conocedoras de la situación politica cubana consideran que la presión del Gobier-
no de Washington ha logrado eliminar a la ciudad de Miami como centro de conspiración contra
el actual Gobierno de Cuba por lo que en su lugar se escogia Panama.
Como es natural, se supone que nuestro Gobierno y sobra todo los servicios do inteligencia
la Guardia Nacious! y la Secreta estuvieron enterados de la presencia en Questra capital y de
lne actividados desarrolladas por el señor Núñez Portuondo.
豹
14-00000
Potentes Emisoras
C
Por otra parte, se incalcó que contactos lo
gadoj anteriormente a Panamá, iniciaran gesi
ors para la compra de dos fincas, una
de las
cuales estacia ubicada en Chirigus Ia otra ra
la región de Sora, población situada en et...
pregimiento de Brjuco.
Las fuentes informantes dijeron que f
ciones comanadas de los recien llegados, mdicau
que hay la intención de drdicar
fincas,
aprsenterornte al cultivo de tabaci, pere que is
intraciós roul es la de ubicar dos poteater ermica.
ras dende la cual iniciar la campaña trazade.
por Núñez Portrends contra el gobiern
lucionario de Cuba.
☐ SE INSTALARAN EN PANAMA PARA
COMBATIR AL GOBIERNO DE CUBA
Alrededor de dieciseis personas -pimmi-
nentes figuras durante la dictadura de Batista--
arribaron antier a Panamá. Fuentes exlinofi
ciales informaron que entre elas personas
encuentra el famoso torturador Venture, quien
se dejo entrever és el jets del grupo recién lle.
gedu.
1. llegada del grus en referencia tiene,
segue le informantes, ración con la compaña
trazado por el ex-embandar Nunez Portuondo
pera combeatic el régimes de Fidel Castro, la-
bor que dejara lista durente su incognita per
mancecie roma huésped uel Hotel Panama Hi.
Pave a la Pag. 14 L'etre G
...
La Nación
Jurves 22 de Octubre de 1544-6100 nami K. de l'. är
14-00000
T.C
(c) Da 20 cctober 1959, confidential sources of 's office beld an interviev
vith Dr. Bailio tuando, leader of tum Cuban doal exdles. Alen pesant
visa for, Rafael Garcia Navarre, Cubes on-in-law of hores and honorary Consul of
Penaza La Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The following information was furnished by HUMEZ
during the interviews
Dr. BANKZ inftiated the ocavereation by stating that KB had just completed
a tour of Haru, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Brasil during which established
personal contact with the Presidents, Award Forces' leaders, and other personalities
of the afo recentioned countries in an effort to enlist their norul and material
support in his endsayors.
In heru, President anual Prado informed Dr. NUNEZ that his Governsent le
very perturbed by the activities of de Cuban diplomats in renu The Peruvian
Dove rowent was able to determine that a recent strike staged by bank workers received
financial support from the Cuban Rubassy in Lina.
:
In Chile, President Jorge Alessandri complained of neodling by Cuban
diplomats in the labor and peasant morosants of that country.
Presidant Arturo Frondini of Argentina advised Rr. MAMEZ that the
repercussions of the Cuben revolution are already being falt in that country,
pecially among students, peasants and vorers. The Argantine Secretary of War,
Omeral (Ret.) Alberto Larcher, told Dr. MMS that, in his opinion, the United
States bas but two choices in Cubas To get rid of the Fidel Castro regina nov, by
force if awcessary) or fight Soviet troops on Cuban sail in the future.
The Brazilian President, Juscelino abitschek, expressed alam for the
facbility of the United States Covement to dispose of the present Cuban regize,
valon la the main source of unrest in the Western Bandsphere.
:
Dr. DAMIEN stated that the Presidents of the abovessentioned countries and
thair silitary and diplomatic leaders indicated that they are willing to support the
United States in my move, whether it be military, diplomatic or economic, that would
emedicate forever the threat of Communiat es represented by the Fidel Castro regime.
Dr. Metz continued by saying that ha has an appointment with the President
of Penseza, Emasto de la Quartia, Jr., in which he would inform the President that
prepanations are being mode in Cubs for a nev lavesion of Panans. This time the
Lavaters will be better equipped and organised than during the ill-fated landing
at Playa Colorada in April 1999.
14-00000
SUBJECT: BREZ Portuondo, Dr. Baillo (U)
801-301-99
27 Cot 59
In regard to the internal aftustion in Cuba, Dr. FUKEZ atated that the
country is under the tightest of dictatorships. Free enterprise is fast disappear
ing and state-controlled economy is taking its place. Anti-United States propaganda
is evidens everywhere. Bovist agents are operating freely throughout the country
and are openly infiltrasing the Armed Forces, Goverment agencies and the propagata
media. The Cuban capital has become the new headquarters of the Soviet apparatus vhos
ain is to subvert all of Latin Avnerica.
Dr. MOKZ further stated that he is continuously furnishing information par
taining to the Communist activities in Cuba to
, bat
this agency does not seen to realize the gravity of the situation. Begnoseed dis-
appointment for the lack of assistance RM is receiving from
over, EZB contests with representatives of
and ODEARL
KUBARK,
DACID
CDENVY
have been more encouraging
The anti-Cast:o organisation which Dr. MUKZ heads has 20,000 partisans incida
Cuba vaiting for weapons with which to start a revolt. The great majority of shass
partisans are fonar members of the disbanded Cuban Regular Armed Forces. Dr. MUNEZ'
organisation has sufficient funds to purchase enough weapons in Spain to arm thase
groups) however, the Spanish Govermant vill not release the veapons until the United
Statas Covemoment gives its approval.
The French Government has offered Dr. FEZ facilities to train personnel in
the islands of Martinique or Guadaloups in the French West Indies. The Governmante
of Gustamala and Pansa have also made similar offers. Rowever, Dr. MUKZ believes that
any amed invasion of Cuba at the present time is boun't to fail because the Cuban people
are being thoroughly indoctricated and subjected to a very intensive propaganda progres
by the Castro regins, while the opposition has been completely gagged. Dr. BREZ further
stated that he also believes that any revolt vill fail unless the Cuban people are sede
cognizant of what is going on behind the scenes and the threat that the Comandat is-
filtration means to Cuba and her future. Dr. MOMEZ said that, prior to any military
operation, the Cuban people mat be subjected to a continuous counter-propagauda harvago,
in which the activities of the Soviet agants and their protectors and collaborators are
exposed. This propagands must also attempt to destroy the myth which has been created
around Fidel Castro's personality. In order to accomplish this project, Dr. MINEZ'
organisation needs urgently a radio station powerful enough to cover the entire Cuban
territory. The Government of the Dominican Republic, through its radio stations, is
: already conducting that type of propaganda. Rowever, the Dominican efforts are
ineffective because of the contoept in which the Cubans bold anything Dominisan end,
therefore, the propaganda originating in the Dominican Republic is solf-defeating.
:
The Governments of Quaterala and Panews have offered Dr. MAKS their
assisteace in operating this radio station from their carcitowy. However, Peasna has
boan ruled out because of its proximity to the United States positions in the Canal
Zona. Dr. FUMEZ does not desire to use radio facilities within the continental United
States to preclude HIS organisation being branded as a tool of the United States or any
international embarrasssent to the Waited States Government. The ideal colution to this
problen vould be a 50,000 watt chort wave radio trmoscitter installed aboard & ship
similar to thoes used by the Voice of America in its broadcast bessed to the Iron
Curtata ocuntries.
2
(8-3)
22
ATTACHMENT B TO EZPA9938
:
:
удо
14-00000
SUBJECT: FUMEZ Portuondo, Dr. Bailio (U)
801-501-59
66 $00 18
(C) This meeting was affected at the suggestion of Dr. Bemardo Cars, Maister
of Justice during the administration of deposed Cuban President Fulgencio Batista. Dr.
Caremes is residing as an exile in Panama.
(A-1)
(U) OP, USABCARTE COMMERZY: Dr. Railio BUIREZ Portuonde is a soa of the late
General Bailio Rames, ona of the heroes of the Cubea revolutionary vars agninst
Spain. Dr. BUKI Las deea a Congreamman and a Senator in Cuba several times,
Ambassador to Panama, and Chier of the Cuban Delegation to the United Nations
from 1952 to 1956. HS was President of the Security Council during the Hungarian
revolt.
:
3
CONFIDESO
14-00000
TRANSITION
CONFIDENT!
22 October 1959
CONFIDENTIAL REPORT
We have learned from a good and reliable source that the Cuban government
is thinking of discharging 5,000 members of the revolutionary army at the
end of November or beginning of December 1959. The end purpose of this is to
have the discharged man take part in invasions of Panama and the Dominican
Republics the Cuban government could not be blamed for such actions, since the
men would not be menbers of the regular Cuban Army. The invasions will be
carried out simultaneously, in order to obstruct any quick action by the
Organisation of American States (OAS). The same source indicates that 3,000
well-armed men will take part in the invasion of Panama, and that the men
will come here under the command of Corsaander Ernesto ("Che") GUEVARA, who
it appears received precise instructions while on his trip to Egypt. It
appears that intentions are first to take over Panama, and, after that, to u
undertake an international campaign for NATIONALIZIM the Panama Canal, For
the latter campaign, they will have the support of several Latin American and
several European countries, as well as of several Panamanian political groups,
including the Tercer Partido Nacionalista which already has declared itself
in that regard. The same source indicates that, before the invasions come about,
there will be an open publicity campaign to pave the way and to produce
internal upheavals in Panama and the Dominican Republic. It appears that the
invasions will receive material, financial, and other support from the
Venesuelan government.
NOTE: This information can be verified by / PAPRIDE intelligence services
and EACID offices in the countries concerned. In time, it will be seen
if the actions noted at the beginning of this report have happened, and, if
so, it will indicate that the rest will come about in due course. The
informant tells us that Cuba, Venesuelan, and Panamanian Communists will take
a very active part in everything.
201-45667