14-00000
104-10220-10117
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
UNCLASSIFIED
INTERNAL
ONLY
SURJECT: PO
CONFIDENTIAL
SECRET
ROUTING AND RECORD SHEET
FROM:
J. Esterline, c/wit/h:caf
NO.
CATE
8 March 1960
COMMENTS (Number each commant to show hom whom
to whom. Crow a line across colume after each comment)
10:anchan, room water, and
building)
1.
Mr. Bernolds
2.
Mr. Toomey
DATE
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
CEIVED
FORWARDED
八
2.
7
3.
M. Marpe
4.
OA
5.
6.
7.
• Sery
9.
10.-
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
FORM
:
I DEC 3
Copy attached for you
retention should you desire.
3. Copy attached for your
initial retention and then
please forward for Subject
Tile. Thank you.
Napura in Section
17. File ODDALE
610
うどん
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
ARMONY STON CH
TH
14-00000
SECRET
8 March 1960
ΜΕΜΟΡΑΝΙΑIM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting with fr. William Pawley and Fabio FREYRS on Financial
and Organizational Matters
TIME & PLACE: 1455 Hours, 2 March 1960; Mr. Pauley's Office in and
1. Jacob Esterline, using the name Jacob England, met for two hours with
Mr. Pawley and Mr. FREYRE on the date indicated. The following subjects were
covered during this meeting:
Regarding the bond issue which Mr. Pawley is floating in
view of raising $2,000,000 for support of of Tosition activities,
Ecterline told him that the first two candidates to sign the issue
were quite acceptable. These people are Emilio OCHOA Ochos and
Dr. Gustavo CUEKO. Esterline said the other two Mr. Pawley had
suggested were turned down in Washington--not for any personal
reasons, but merely because they had been too closely associated
with BATISTA elements in the past. After some resistance, particularly
with regard to MARQUEZ Sterling, Mr. Pawley's third candidate, he
agreed to consider others. Two of the most prominent candidates
mentioned vere Antonio VAROMA, Autentico leader, and Jorge ZAVES,
former editor of the Habana daily newspaper, La Avance. Although
Mr. Pawley and his colleague, Mr. FRZYRZ, had no reservations with
regard to ZAYAS, they were of mixed emotions on VARONA--particularly
because of a recent report they had received from RUBIO Padilia in
Habana indicating that VARONA is Aurther to the left than had formerly
been considered. This point was debated at length and it was inally
decided that the resolution would turn on whether or not Mr. VARONA
would be willing to come to the States and formally Join the opposition.
(HOTE TO MR. ROOM: (1) Where is ZAYAS at the present time and when can
he be brought back to the United States to sign the bonds? (2) Save we ever
had any leftist traces on VARONA before? Also, is the Station in touch with
him and could they determine through a channel other than RUBIO Padilla whether
VARONA will, in fact, come to the United States for a purpose such as this?)
Mr. Pawley is pressing for action in getting the bonds signed and his
point is well taken. it must be noted, however, that it would be foolish
to accept names which are less than acceptable because, in the long run,
it would defeat our purtose.
b. On the question of publication of a Cuban newspaper in Miami,
Esterline said he understood that Mr. Pawley had made arrangements for
the publication of Diario de Marius in Miami. Mr. Pawley said that he
had, and with enthusiasm sata that he had also beer able to locate Spanish
conversion kits for the Linotype anchines which does away with the necessity
of buying; the machines. Esterline then queried him on what his reaction
SECRET
14-00000
to printing Avance since it would be defunct for all practical purposes
In Cuba. Mr. Pavley again said with entinuslarm that ho would be prepared
to print Avarre as soon as ZAYAS med to the country. It was mutually
agreed that this should be one of the priority propaganda targets for the
inmediate future.
c. During a recent conversation with Chief, WIID in Washington, Mr.
Pawley made the remark that through his friends in Miami he had contact
with action groups in Pinar del Rio and Comairy. Prior to Esterline's
departure for Mai, C, WilD asked him to look into these groups in more
detail with Mr. Pawley. The subject van accordingly raised and Mr. Pavley
and Mr. FREYkz, who had most of the cubatamive information, provided the
following:
(1) On Pinar del Rio, Mr. FREIRE said there was a group
in that area, but he did not have the name of it at his finger-
tips at the moment. He offered to get it within the next few
days and make it available through Mr. Pawley,
(2) On Carmaguey, Mr. FKGYRE said that a Doctora TOMEY (sp?)
is actively working with retired elements of the old army living
in that area. This croup--and it would appear that she may have
contact with 300 at the moment (the total group is approximately
4500)--13 supposedly organizing as a resistence army in Camaguey."
Dra. TOGY has complete responsibility for this organization. She
is aided by a Dr. Santos Sordo. Mr. FPEYKE said that should any-
boly attempt to contact Dra. TOMEX and she was not present, contact
could be made with Dr. Santos Gordo who would put them in touch
with her. Mr. FREYRE appeared to have no Aurther details of the
group other than those set forth above. He did say, however,
that ther e vas an existing contact plan which anybody could use
with complete security either on the telephone or in a personal
meeting. This plen would work as follows:
The person contacting Dra. TOVEY should say they
are coming from Zeta 39 to talk to Aden 37 (these are old
scrority and fraternity designatione). Having established
this, they should then say to the Doctora that they are
coming to consult about agrarian reform. This will establish
the bona fides of the person making contact as a friend of
Μ. ΓΡΖΥΡΣ.
(Note to Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Tooney: Please have somebody prepare a diepatch
on the accessibility of the FRLIPS group and suxest to the Station that licuiqurters
is interested in determining core precisely the rawerical strength and composition of
Dra. TOY's group. The dispatch should also suggest that Station Habana select a
non-official person to take this contact. Although I would recomment that an
American be used for this, I really don't know enough about the situation in Cazaney
to know whether the Doctora would be very happy about meeting an wertean. FRES,
however, cave no indication that an American waking army contact would be objectionable.)
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 -- stratate ecctcers
1- Memo Pile
S
J. D. Esterline
c/

