14-00000
104-10185-10206
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
PV
5 August 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: AMMOG/1
-
Phone Call to Cuba
1. On today's date ur. De Canti and I were told by
AMMUG/1 that he had called Cuba from the apartment at
24 Summit Hill on Wednesday night. As an excuse for having
done so against our instructions to wait until Mr. Safely's
return he started blening the lack of help received from
any of us in this matter. He called the DC operator and
placed the call at 2030 on 11 August 1904 and contacted
his wife at 2330 to 2340 hours.
2. AMMUG/1 denied having discussed his whereabouts
and stated that the only thing discussed was the leCK of
regular mail to and from him and his wife. According to
AMMJG/1 his wife told him that she had been ordered to
vacate her quarters in Havana and that she had not been
bothered by any Intelligence organization.
3. I set upon him and made clear to him his position
in this country vis-a-vis ourselves. Rather seriously I
made him admit that his actions had been done as those of
an overgrown child rather thin of an intelligent man and
an intelligence agent. I told him that now the DSE and
the DGI knew his exact whereabouts and that the strong
possibility existed of his phone being tapped. when he
asked how this could be I reminded him that the Cubans
had eyes and ears here in the presence of the Czech Embassy,
for one. (The latter statement was meant strictly to throw
a scare into him.)
4. After bo had admitted his foolishness I told him
that any requests for further phone calls and or letters
would be curtailed. That we would allow him to write his
wife only. all other matters are to wait for Er. Safely's
return.
5. Re his impending trip to Madrid, he said that perhaps
the trip should be suspended until he thought the time would
be vise and then only by himself. I also set upon him at
14-00000
-2-
this point and made him understand that the proposed trip
would be made when we said and as we asid. This also he
admitted was true. Another remark by him that if it were
up to us his wife would not be able to leave Cube for ten
years was handled by me shockingly and answered by the
remark that she would have been out yesterday.
6. Before we left ANNUG/1 he rengaderod that de deserved
the dressing com I had given him and that he would not
sulk about it because in spite of everything he had done,
he was not a child.
B. Hidalgo
WR/SA/CI
Distribution:
1-A/1 file
1- Vivian
1- Barney
1- WH/SA/CI/Chrono

