14-00000
104-10102-10088 2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 税込
Brand - Adonis Kanine Care. in fail
26 Love 1960
Why did
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Preliminary Debriefing Report on MPALIC-7
Activities in Cuba
1. The substance of this preliminary report covers debriefing sessions
held with AMPANIC-7 from 7 through 15 November 1960. Both ir. Pekich and the
undersigned participated in these debriefing periods. The pertinent aspects
of these debriefing sessions are summarized into four specific categories:
a.
ANPANIC-7's operational activities in Cuba from his initial
arrival in Cuba 5 August until his departure 5 November 1960.
use.
b. Internal assets developed in Cuva for future operational
c. Problems encountered by A-7 while operating in Cuba.
d. Projected future assignment in Cuba.
2. lir. James Pekich, who was APANIC-7's case officer during his initial
training in Washington, was contacted by phone from Miami by subject on
7 November. Subject reported that he had arrived in the U. S. by boat 5 Jov.
and was planning to leave that afternoon by plane for Washington. A room was
booked at the Washington Hotel in anticipation of A-7's arrival that evening.
At approximately 1800 hours, A-7 called fir. Pekich on the agent phone from the
Washington airport to announce his arrival and was directed to go to the hotel,
where subject was subsequently contacted by Hr. Pekich and the undersigned.
3. Upon contacting A-7 at the hotel, it was clearly evident that he was
In a highly emotional state mich partly stems from his recent escape fron
we sand Cuca. In his initial emotional outburst, A-7 stated that we had not lived up
hin
to our commitments to support his activities in Cuba; that he didn't like the
idea of considering himself as being expendable; that he was not sure we we
sent him to Cuba in the first place if we had no intentions to support his
activities inside the country. In short, A-7 felt we had let him down com-
pletely and that he was fortunate in esceping without losing his life.
After Mr. Pekich succeeded in quieting dom A-7 following this initial
outburst, A-7 was first asked to describe how he managed to get out of Cuba
without utilizing our channels to effect this efiltration.
00469
*
14-00000
2
Jocome Stomy
A-7 stated that on 18 October he had sent on urgent message
to his Have contact (NET) informing him that his situation סמן
precarious and that he must get out of Cuba as soon as possible. Ac-
cording to A-7 his Agency contact was unable to provide any definite
assurance that his deperture from Cuba could be expedited. He then
attempted to lay on unilateral errengements to this end with first
his operational contact, Benito FERNANDEZ, and later his mother-in-
law introduced A-7 to a (Dr. Jose VALES, ſa psychiatrist in Havane, who
offered to assist him in getting out of Cuba. In the course of the
next ten days, A-7's plans to get out of Cuba began to take shape,
after Dr. Vales introduced him to Dr. Francisco PRADO, (a plastic
(surgeon who operates his own clinic in Havana. On 1 November a negro
by the name of (Lazero RODRIGUEZ Arozarena, drove to A-7's safehouse
and took him to his own house located on (64th Street 23-25 in Marianao.
On the morning of 2 November at 1100 hours, (Dr. PRADO arrived at the
Negro's house and told A-7 that he pianned to leave for Key West
Florida 5 November and would arrange to smuggle A-7 out of Cuba by
hiding him in the motor room of his yacht. Arrangements were mače
between the principals for A-7 to visit the yacht 4 November to in-
spect his proposed hiding place on the yacht. In the interim period,
A-7 stated that he began to suspect that he may have fallen into a
trap and told the Negro that he was returning to the U. S. to bring
Tony VARONA back with him to Cuba. A-7 felt this was a good girmick
to use in the event (Dr. PRADO planned to turn him over to the G-2.
After inspecting his hiding place on the yacht, A-7 told Dr. PRADO he
didn't like the idea of hiding in the motor room and suggested that
he swim out to the boat, where he could be picked up at sea.
night (4 November) A-7 stayed at the home of (Guido BRITO, who had a
house close to the beach at Santa Maria del Her located about
25 Kilometers from Havena. On 5 November at 0630 hours, A-7 began
his long swim in rough, choppy waters and was finally sighted by
Dr Prado's yacht, where he was taken on board the vessel. (A-7
states that he was completely exhausted when he was picked up by the
vessel).
That
(Dr. Prado's yacht SOMA, piloted by Eduerdo OLEVAM reached
Key West, Florida 5 November at 1445 hours. A-7 managed to slip away
during the refueling of the yacht before the custom officials arrived
and irmediately took off for Mieni. Upon reaching Miani, A-7 vent
directly to his wife's home for a reunion with his family. In query-
ing A-7 further on how (Dr. Prado managed to leave Cube without any
serious obstacles placed in his path by the ECB, A-7 stated that
Dr. Prado told him that he received official approval for this trip.
to return a stolen vessel from his yacht club, Casino Topanol, in
Havana, which was being held for him by American authorities in
Hey West. Norcover, Dr. Prado told 1-7 that he planned to leave the
14-00000
-3-
")לינסוh about $25,000) in Ner Wäst, Florida, mich he hoped to put
up for sale at some future date. (It would appear that or. Frado was afraid
that all such vessels as his would subsequently he nationalized by the Castro
regime.) Prior to his return to Cuba, Dr. Prado planned to stay at the West
Drive Harbor Island, Miami Tel: (PL 1-5310.
4. Efforts to debrief A-7 on his operational activities in Cuba were
somewhat futile in this initial meeting in view of his unsettled emotional
state. His primary concern appeared to be his wife and his rather strained
relationship with his in-laws, who were now residing in Miami. In this con-
nection, it should be pointed out that this emotional state appeared to stem,
in part, from his inherent suspicions that his wife (21 years of age and rel-
atively attractive) was being unfaithful to him. All indications are, however,
that A-7 has no real basis for these suspicions; other than those conjured un
in his own mind. In any case, he requested if it might not be possible to wire-
tap his wife's house in Miami, so that he could have daily reports on her activi-
ties. While no promises were made, A-7 was assured we would attempt to look
into this possibility, once we had more definite information that there were
some grounds for his suspicions. (Note: Subsequent discussions with Security
Office revealed that a wire-tap of A-7's house was a major project in itself
and impossible to accomplish at this time without tieing up considerable
personnel.) A-7 was later told this after we assured him that his suspicions
were groundless where his wife was concerned.
5. Following this initial meeting with A-7, it was apparent to both
Cr. Pekich and the undersigned that time would be needed to restore agent's
confidence in our capability to support his efforts in any future projected
assignment in the field. Moreover, A-7's emotional state, which appears to
stem from his problems with his in-laws and his concern about leaving his wife
alone, must be fully resolved before attempting to dispatch him again.
6. In later debriefing session held from 8 to 15 November with A-7,
considerable more light was thrown on the nature and scope of his operational
activities in Cuba. As previously indicated in paragraph 1 of this report,
A-7's activities are summarized as follows:
?
a. ALMPANIC-7 Operational Activities in Cuba:
In line with his projected mission to organize resistance groups
in Havana and Pinar del Rio for mounting sabotage operations against
key target installations and assasination of prominent Cuban Communist
members in the Castro entourage, A-7 appears to have made some progress
in this direction from the time he arrived in Cuba in early August 1960
to his subsequent exfiltration 5 November. Upon arrival in Havana,
A-7 began a series of meetings with leaders of the OA, Triple-A and DC
with a view to establishing some degree of rapport in the furtherance
of his own personal objectives. It is significant to note that, in
a period of approximately 5 weeks, A-7 made contact with over 42 indi-
viduals, who represented various anti-Castro groups operating in the
Havana and Pinar del Rio areas. A-7 Frenkly admitted that he hed spread
himself out too thin in this respect and that in many cases he should
SEODET
14-00000
SECRET
-4-
have employed cut-outs instea of attempting to contact certain
individuals himself. Individual meetings were also held by 1-7 with
APANIC-5, Dr. Lino Fernander and ARUG-1 with a view to establishing
some degree of rapport and coordination of activities in the area.
In this connection, A-7 claims he turned over a number of his assets
over to MPANIC-5, prior to his movement to the ESCMEPLAY, where he
was subsequently picked up by C-2.
b. Internal Assets Developed in Cuba for Future Operational Use:
In attempting to sift out specific assets developed by A-7 during
his activities in Havana, three of the more prominent individuals with
whom A-7 was in direct contact should be listed.
(1) Benito FERIANDEZ):
owner of the Auto-Marts and (Auto-Centro
(Garages in Havana. A-7 used FERNANDEZ for planning the
selection of suitable LZ's end. DZ's in both Pinar del Rio
and Oriente provinces, location of safehouses in Havana and
use of his garages for storage of arms and military equipment
which A-7 anticipated would be dispatched to him.
(2) Dr. Helio NARDO Beizt a lawyer by profession, who has unlimited
contacts in Pinar del Rio and who was working closely with A-7
to form a guerrilla group in the Sierra de los Organos. (NARDO was
also selected to handle the propaganda for the "Cuba Libre" group
being organized by A-7 inside Cuba.
(3) Francisco ROBAYNAS Dominguez: a Cuban national who had served.
in the U.S. Army and who also fought in the scambrays cgainst Patist
forces. ROBAYNA claimed he had a force of 150 men at his disposal
and was planning to use them in a guerrilla action against Castro
forces in the Pinar del Rio area. Moreover, once proper materiel
support in the form of arms and other military equipment was made
available to him by A-7, he felt he could marshal over a thousand
men in this area.
(14) In addition to the above assets, A-7 indicated that MIRE-1
(known to him as (Emilio Rodriguez) (George DePilot (Juan Mendez))
rendered him considerable assistance in moving securely about Havana
in the course of his operational contacts. In the case of AMIRE-1,1
A-7 highly praised his abilities as a highly capable Case Officer;
and he feared for his personal safety. He suggested that MORE-1
should be brought back to the U.S. for a rest period, before C-2
picked him up.
(5) Finally, ANPUG-l who was trained in sabotage techniques in the
U.S. and was later assigned to 4-7, was listed by A-7 as en asset,
who could be channeled into more specific operations, once available
materiel was forthcoming. He felt, however, that he and MPUG-1
were at considerable odds on certain aspects of conducting operatio..
14-0000
SECRET
-5-
in Havana, but felt he could resolve these differences upon
his om return.
Problems Encountered by A-7 while Operating in Cuba:
Some of the more significant problems encountered by A-7
during the course of his operations in Havana are as follows:
(1) Security: In this connection, A-7 stated that despite
the disguise given him, he had to be constantly on the alert
from the danger of being picked up by G-2 or Castro police
during the course of his numerous operational contacts. He
sited several examples where he believed he was under sur-
veillance by the opposition and subsequently succeeded in allud-
ing this surveillance. He complained that his disguise, (hair-
piece and mustache) rapidly deteriorated in the Havana climate
and as a consequence he was forced to abandon this disguise towar
the latter part of his stay in Havana. Similarly, he was forced
to change his quarters continually, by moving from one safehouse
to another as a security precaution, since he felt that it was
generally known in Cuban circles that he was operating in the
Havana area, and that he was probably already under the sur-
veillance of Castro security forces.
(2) Materiel Support: In the course of these debriefing
sessions, one of A-7's chief complaints was thet despite his
urgent messages sent through his cut-out (AERE-I) to the Station
that arms and other military equipment were sorely needed by
his groups in Havana and Pinar del Rio, no action was taken to
implement his requests. As a result, A-7 felt he was losing face
with his followers and this was one of the primary factors for
returning to the States to discuss this aspect with Headquarters.
(3) Need for Direct Communication: A-7 stated that without the
services of a W/T operator who could be in direct communication
with us, he is fully convinced that any subsequent return to Cub
in an operational capacity would be ineffectual. Hence, this
would be one of the conditions laid on us that when he returned,
a W/T operator would be assigned to him personally.
7. Projected Future Assignment of A-7 in Cuba: Predicated on the assum
tion that A-7 will be sent back to Cuba in the relatively near future, both
Mssrs. Pekich and Peters, feel that his most significant contribution can be
made in the Pinar del Rio area, where he appears to have known assess in the
hills. This, however, does not preclude A-7 from also operating in Ravena in
developing sabatoge operations with A PUG-1, whom we assume will cooperate
with A-7 despite their differences in how these operations should be conduct
Moreover, should the YUM complex decide to move into other provinces of
*Cuba where military action is to take place, A-7 would appear to be the logic
14-0000
SECRET
-6-
choice in taking over the operations in this area against Castro targets.
In any case, a decision has been reached that A-7 should not be dispatched
without a trained W/T operator who can be relied on to work closely on
operations with A-7 inside the country.
8. Case Officer Comments: Despite A-7's tendencies to operate on
a grandiose scale, his disappointment in the lack of support received on his
initial mission to Cuba; and his display of emotional instability at times,
it is believed that his efforts can be properly channeled to work effectively
for us in Cuba. His motivation appears to stem from his personal ambitions
to make his mark on this counter-revolution against Castro, where he can
assure himself of a priminent position in the future government to be formed
in Cuba after the overthrow of the Castro regime. A-7 has imagination and
the will to succeed. His weakness is his inability to hide his personal
embitions from others who may work with him and who may have altogether dif-
ferent motivations and sense of values. Hence, it is believed that A-7
will encounter problems in handling peole recruited or assigned to him in
the course of his activities inside the country. AMPUG-1 can be sited as
a good example, where a clash of personalities has apparently already taken
place. In view of this, A-7 will have to be dealt with firmly and must be
convinced that the success or failure of his projected mission will depend
on his ability to develop confidence and loyalty among his followers once hè
is inside the country again. Similarly, A-7 must resolve his personal problem
dealing with his wife and in-laws, which has had an adverse effect on him
personally since his return, and may affect his operations inside Cuba. The
next several weeks will, therefore, need be devoted to re-establish A-7's
confidence in our ability to support his efforts in Cuba, once he is sent
back, and working out his family problems to obviate any adverse psycholo-
gical effect which may be detrimental to his operations im Cuba.
SEORET
JOHI D. PETERS
WH/4/PM/OES