104-10176-10002
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
LASSIF CATE
SECRET
XXX
PROCESSING ACTION
MARKED FOR INDEXING
TO
Chief, WH Division
INFO.
Chief of Station, Caracas
FROM
Chief of Station, Mexico City
SUBJECT
City/
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
ONLY QUALIFIED DESK
CAR JUDGE BROEKING
MICROFILM
OPBRUMEN/LIRING-3/Transmittal of Photograph of Sergio ALDEZ and LIRING-3
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCE
FYI
IRE CONTACT WT-153-797301)
LACIT MOUL
:
Forwarded under separate cover is a photograph of Sergio VALDEZ
(on the left) and LIRING-3 taken recently by the LIEMBRACE team.
VALDEZ, a Mexican leftist, has had several contacts with LIRING-3 to
discuss the establishment of a commercial cover facility in Venezuela
to provide help to the leftist rebels in that country.
;
:
MICROFILMED
AJG 4 1967
DOC. MICROCES
Attachment;
Ravand A. Stadgen
for Willard C. CURTIS
Photo a/s above UNDER SEPARATE COVER
Distribution:
2-C/WED w/att
1-Cos/Caracas w/att
2- FILES
ROS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
DATE
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND BER
MMA-32599
CLASIFICATIO
SECRET
-201-798301-
24 July 1967
BOS FELL NUMBER
201-798301
护
ききいある
SECRET
SCA TO HMHA-32599 of 24 JULY 1967
TO: CHIEF/WH DIVISION
FM: COS/MEXICO CITY
SECRET
NOT SUITCLE FOR MICROFILM
7/5
CS COPY
HMMA 2599
201-798301
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOK
10
NFD.
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Chief of Station, Caracas
SUBJECT
Chief of Station, Mexico City (1
PBRUMEN/The LIRING-3 Operation
ACTICE REQUIRED REFERENCE
BYI
X
PROCESSINGACION
ENG
MING PEDIPED
ALTOLSEDEX
CAR ACCE ACG
MICROFLU
1. Forwarded under separate cover are four reports written by
Wallace B. ROWTCN on the most recent developments of the LIRING-3
operations. Two of these reports cover the transcripts of two conversa-
tions between LIRING-3, Sergio VALDEZ and Raul MORENO held at the LIRING-3
safehouse on 23 and 28 June. Ca both instances, the tape produced by
the LIROSIN listening post was of poor quality, but that produced by the
Uher recorder installed directly in LIRING-3's safehouse by LIRING-3 and
POUPON na catteferen
who factallation hoe boom p
technical breakdowns that seem to be the result of some form of in-
compatability between the receiver set and the recorder used in the
installation. Steps have been taken to remedy this situation. As a
result, the technical quality of the LIROSIN product has gradually inproved.
1
:
2. The information contained in the report dated 6 July provides
additional data on VALDEZ's contact with Venezuelan leftists in Caracas.
Some of this information was cabled to the Caracas Station in MEXICO CITY
1954. As pointed out in following correspondence, VALDEZ and MORENO, who
are disillusioned with Communist Party backing of the Venezuelaa reteis,
will probably go ahead with their plans for Venezuela with or without:
LIRING-3's advice ani support, at least as far as the establishment of a
commercial cover faci'ity is concerned. Neither will VALDEZ and his friend
stop there. These two idealists hope to "branch out" if they can inte other
areas of Latin America, both Central and South (one of the countrics seat toned"
was Brazil). Although they have no funds to speak of they can probably find
enough money among wealthy supporters of the arts such as Maryedith GARCIA
in Caracas to get started. A possible trip by LIRING-3 to Venezuela as
proposed by ROWTON was ruled out by this Station which intends to limit
LIRING-3's involvement with VALDEZ and MORENO to the monitoring of their
plans. To achieve this goal, LIRING-3 must take some interest in the
continued
...
Attachment:
Reports a/s para 1 UNDER SEPARATE COVER
Distribution:
2C/WHD w/att
T-COS/Caracas w/o att
3- PILES
HATT
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
DISPATCH SYMBOL ANG NUMBER
HMMA-32635
GASSIFICATION
SECALITATOK
201-79830%
DATE
27 July 1967
MOS FILE BORBE
201-798301
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOX
HA-32635 :
FORM
Mexican's commercial ventures. LIRING-3 thus joined VALDEZ and MORENO
in a new company "Colorluz" based in Mexico for the production and :
sale of colored glass. Letterhead paper of this company is forwarded
attached to RONTON'S 6 July report. "Colorluz" is so far only a paper
company and the address listed in its letterhead is that of a workshop
belonging to a girlfriend of VALDEZ by the name of "Alejandra". VALDEZ
is currently producing samples of colored glass in that shop to be sent
to Maryedith GARCIA in Venezacha.
:
3. As for the questions raised in paragraph 4 of CARACAS 7262 and
in Hew-15550 concerning ROWTON's relationship with LIRING-3, the degree
to which control has been established over that asset, and the tests that
have been made of his claimed relationship with the Guateerlan guerrillas,
we would like to point out:
A. That an effort was made recently to clarify the nature of
ROWTON's relationship with both LIRING-3 and LIRING-4 in HMMA-32243.
The long and short of it is that LIRING-3 AND LIRING-4 are at the
point where they will do almost anything asked by ROWTON without
asking questions (this has been already touched upon several times
in the voluminous detailed and time consuming reporting on this
operation undertaken to keep Headquarters abreast of every minute
development in the hope of clarifying the very points raised by
both Headquarters and the Caracas Station). It is no exaggeration
to say that LIRING-3 has lived a new lifa einna hieman...
ROWTON which he finds interesting and rewarding to the point that.
in spite of recurring crisis and second thoughts, he is unwilling
to break with ROWTON and go back to the way he lived before meeting
him. LIRING-4, on the cher hand, is grateful to ROWTON for helping
her keep a husbad she is very much in love with. Both are becoming
more and more disillusioned with the Cuban "revolutionaries" they
meet. LIRING-4 recently admitted to ROUTCH that she has little use
for the Cuban revolution and has nc desire to return to Cuba. This
does not mean that LIRING-3's political views are not orientated to
the left. After prolonged contact with ROWION, who has made deltberate
efforts to raise his intellectual and material standards, there is
little question, Lowever, that LIRING-3 is not as far to the left
as he was before and that he is much more of a realist. LIRING-4
who is not very politically minded just follows the beliefs of her
husband.
:
B. LIRING-3's safehouse (as opposed to the spertment where he
currently lives with his wife) is the target of a technical operation
and is also covered by LIFEAT. Both products are reviewed in detail
by ROWTON and his findings sent regularly to Headquarters. ROWTON
and Cornelius L. PEUVION, in addition, both review the product of the
LIFEAT coverage on the apartment of LIRING-9 (LIRING-4's ex-boss).
LIRING-9, VALDEZ and GARCIA of the Guatemalan FAR have been the target
of Station surveillance. While GARCIA has so far not been identified
by the LIEMBRACES (and this is definitely the result of bad luck nove
than specific evasive tactics on the part of GARCIA), the LIEMBRACES
periodically surveilled both LIRING-3 and VALDEZ (they also attempted
to surveil Enrique MORALES but the man they followed turned out to be
the wrong one). This surveillance has so far produced nothing to
cast suspicion on LIRING-3. On the contrary, it has established in
the case of GARCIA) that LIRING-3 does meet a man corresponding to his
description of PARCIA. LIRING-3, as well as his wife, has also produced
an identikit ccaposite of GARCIA which was close to that produced
by the LIEMBRACES and was recently thought by LIREBEL-2 to resemble
Luis CASTILLO Ralda (see MEXICO CITY 2139 and HMMA-32598), a κηρνα
Guatemalan Communist in Mexico believed to be in contact with the FAR.
When VALDEZ and MORENO recently started their discussions with him,
LIRING-3, at his own initiative, had their discussions recorded. La
addition to the above efforts to check LIRING-3's activities, this
Station raized the possibility of having LIRING-3 SGSWIRLED, passing
the WOFACT SGSWIRL operator as a technician working for a local
Mexican bank (Mexican banks use SGSWIRL investigative techniques).
Headquarters advised that no Spanish speaking SGSWIRL operator would
be available before 1 June (DIRECTOR 99380). To this Station's
knowledge, no more has been heard on this topic from Headquarters
864 530
USE PREVIOUS EDITI
401
こ、こちらがCATION
SECRET/KAPOK
८
CONTINUED
PAGE TO.
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOX
CM SIMBOL
HPA-32635
1
since that date.
C. What control factors do we thus have on LIRING-3 and LIRING-4?
We have, for example, the fact that he receives a salary from ROVION
in return for information on Cuban and leftists subversive activities.
ROWTON, at the beginning of the operation, told LIRING-3 thet he
needed this information for economic purposes. As ROWTON wes ia
terested in dealing with the Cubans, he had to kars as auch abest
their activities as possible. To say that LIRING-3 does not believe
that ROWTON has motives other than purely economic gain would be
to underestimate LIRING-3's intelligence. LIRING-S has several
times told ROWTON, however, that he does not know what the letter's
real motives are and is past caring what they may be. This sakes
the collection of information on Cuben and leftist activities for
ROWTON all the more a control factor, as LIRING-3 is in fact
"spying" on the Cubans and the leftists they support. Public
knowledge of this would put an end to his relationship with various
types of leftist elements, to the money he receives from ROVTON
and to the type of life he likes and can not live without ROWICH.
The false Mexican documents that LIRING 3 has recently obtained for
himself and for some of his leftist friends are another source of
control. Obtaining false documents is a punishable offense in
Mexico which could get LIRING-3 in jail. The tapes of LIRDC-38
recent conversations with VALDE7 and MORENO could also be used as
a form of catro save and the
heard on the tapes before LIRING-3's conversations with the Mexican
leftists, indicating that LIRING-3 knew that these talks were
recorded for the benefit of someone unknown to VALDEZ and MERINO,
but obviously interested in their plans. Since the Cuben Encasay
sent the two Mexicans to LIRING-3, the disclosure of the tapes
existence and of their content could really hurt LIRING-3. We know
from the technical operation on LIRING-3's safehouse and it's
LIFEAT coverage that LIRING-3 has a mistress. Although he does not
always get along very well with his wife, he has assumed an air of
self righteousness during domestic arguments with her. LIRIS:-3 can
be expected to do his utmost to prevent her from knowing about the
other woman as such knowledge would personally hurt him very much.
Finally, the fact that LIRING-4 has smuggled official documents
from the Cuban Embassy with the knowledge that they were copied
before given back to her as well as the fact ther this had zise
blessing of LIRING-3 certainly constitute elements of control ca
LIRING-3 as well as LIRING-4.
:
:
530
USE PREVIOUS EDITION.
for Willard C. CURTIS!
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET/KAPOK
CONTINUED
PAGE NO
THREK
:
:
SECRET/KAPOK 27-1287
1. LIRING/3 re opted to Eaton at 1200 meeting 6 July, 1967, that
Sergio Taldez informed him ca previcus evening that his principal
contact in Caraces with Venezuelan resistance organization is
Kaxiin Zeziro Ortega whom he criginally met in Mexico City and who
instructed him in event Valdez visited Caracas to insert add in
one of principal newspapers with following text: "La persona interesaća
en Artesanía Mexicana favor de Kontaz comunicar con Sergio Valdez,"
followed by address. According Valdez Ortega or some other representative
resistance movement would then contact him.
:
2. L/3 extracted this information alleging that he planning trip to
Caracas in near future to confer with Angel Arvanitis of Metaloplástica
Guatemalteca who has not as yet been able to leave Caracas because Efx
local business interests still pending. If Ortega of sufficient ops
interest IIRING/13 could actually zake trip contact Crtega on behalf
Valdez and arrange future comme channel. On cover side L/3 is forming
partnership with Valdez for operation of small glass factory located
3 Plaza Niravalle and owned by Mexican woman friend of Valdez.
contacts
3. Valdez also promised introduce 1/3 to Venezuelans in Mexico City
evening 6 July. (Valdez apparently respects L/3's superior knowledge
and experience in clandestine operations and his ostensibly high-level
Cuban contacts).
4. FYI L/3 is working closely under LextEx direction of Rowton who as
is posing as Greek revolutionary with world-wide business interests. 1/3
has never questioned howton's ultimate objectives over past year of col-
laboration apparently in fear of alienating Roston's affections and
losing contact with him (His only contact with Rowton is telephone ans-
wering service number in Mexico City). Roston feels reasonably certain
1/3 would report faithfully on results trip to Caracas, but would recom-
mend station use all technical means available to check his movements.
5. If station desires Roxton could stop off briefly o/a 19 July on return
DDY Georgetown brief station on 1/3 background and discuss plans for
future use locally.
:
}
:
قه
CS COPY
SECRET/KAPOK
YER
H
S/Call / HIMMA-32635
201-798301.
TALLER DE
PLAZA MIRAVALLE 3
VITRALES
COLORLUZ
MEXICO, D. F.
TALLER
DE
PLAZA MIRAVALLE 3
VITRALES COLORLUZ
MEXICO, D. F.
SECRET/KAPOK
10/7/67
i
1.
LIRING/3 reported to Roston evening 9/7/67 that he and 1/4 learned
from Catalina Cepero during dinner 8/7/67 thatfour and possibly more
KIKAXX inspectors checking files and activites of LIBING. They paying
particular attention to the financial sccounts of LIRING/9's office
and are coming up with many unvorable ("muy feas") comments.
woman
2.
1/4 also learned from negro/student residing Kelchor Ocampo with
medical students that Cepeda has recurned but is very glus and withdrawn.
Catalina Cepero also commented to 1/4 that LIRING/9 on his return from
TDY on 3/7/67 expressed surprise and disappointment that kia braDG/4 no
longer working in his office. He has not, however, to date contacted 1/4
personally (cor has he in fast recontacted LIRE3/7). It appears WIRING/9
and others in LIRING are fully occupied with the inspectors.
UBR
SECRET/KAPOX
BR
COPY
S/C att 2 h HMMA-32635
201-798301
SECRET KAPOK
7 July, 1967
Subject:
Transzittal of CHER tar of Meeting Between LIRING/3
Sergio Valdez and Rail Moreno (in 1/3 Safehcuse).
1. Attached is the tape of conversation that took place at the
LIRIG/3 safehouse from about 2330 until well after sidnight on
Friday, 23 June 1967. CIRING/4 was present during the first pert
of the mecting. The recorder and microphone were placed by Boston
and liring in a buffet in the living room a few hours prior to
the meeting.
i
2. Also attached is the transcript of the tape. CIENG/3 appears
as 1), Sergio Valdez as 2) Raúl Moreno as 3) and LTEIG/4 as Mujer".
The first six lines of the transcripticon contain remarks made by
1/3 and Rowton in the final test of the recorder.
3. The original purose of the meeting, according to LIRING/3, was
to meet with the FAR propaganda representative at the University.
when he did not show up with Valdez ani toreno, IRING/3 questioned
them about him and Valdez explained that he could not find hiz, pro-
bally becasue he is taking examinations and Lust keep up his appearance
as a student. 1/3 then mentioned his efforts to obtain the false, "carvi
la (military draft cani) and the fact that he had already given his
half-brother's birth certificate to Jacobo Rodriquez Fadilla since he
himself could not use it ( same last nare).
4. The tape frca the bug in the safehouse unfortunately is notolear
enough to permit a gcoi transcriptioja. It appears, however, that the
Uher recording is a faithful representation of the meeting and there
is no indication of deception before or after the LIRING/3 recording.
S/C att. 0.34 HNIMA-32635
alice 3 Porton
SECAT, KUPOK
CS COPY
201-798301
?
1. Que pasó Fudy? Ferdona, es que estaba en el baño.
2. Está esto aquí mejor.... Vejor cerrar la ventana
viene. Esto es io necesario
,
exo es, porque todo ruido de alli
2. Voy a cerrar....
2. Vamos a ver.
1. Pero mire usted.
1) uiobole.
2) Quiubo, como estas?
1) Que mecuentan?
?!
وحدين وننقمة en visperas de desvelarros.. (risa general)
Lxjer. Esta mojado afuera, verdad?
2) For aquí llović poco, porque...
1) Llović en la tarde.- Que pasó pues con el compañero ese?
2) Eubo un problema, pira. El muchacho este está aquí en parte en apariencia y en parte en
cierto está onno estudiante. Entonces quedé yo de pe lc encontré el otro día en la
universid
1) Usted me había dicho que ya habían hecho cita previa.
2) Si, quedé de verlo concretamente en el café de la escuela, rere resulta que el esta
en examenes entonces quedancs en que previamente le teníacos que hablar. El tienz
que cuider bastante su apariencia de buen estudianto porque es una de las cosas, no?
Entonces quedé yo de hablarle, desgraciadazete no lo he encontrado; seguramente
por allí anda presentando exámenes, no sé. Pero en estos dias, yo creo esta semana
se acaban los examenes en la Universidad y en estos días..el ya puede venir con
nosotros desde el lunes.
!
1) Entonces me avisas de una fecha cuando lo hayas localizado, mas o zenos con...
2) Te acuerdas que à problera de darte confianza, no porque si no....
1) Si, claro. Oyes, quiere de eso? Eso es whiskey eh?
2) Fero con agua.
2) Con agua. Tengo entendido que baja la presión un poco, no?
2) Si...
1) Pero el cigarro la vuelve a srbir. Fijate que curioso, que en cliza caliente el
shiskey sube la presión y aqui es al revés. Con razón cuando yo torabe rucho, salia
asi.... Digo, no siente mucho lo del cuate esté, pero de todos modos tenia yo...
201-798301
como Sergio ze telefoneó ahora, me dijo que probablemente vendría, jo rensé que en
realidad podría venir, no?
2) Si, el problema fué este, que no lo localicé, seguramente ha de estar en casa de
alguien estudiando o una cosa así, no Cye, yo creo que adecas tiene razón este
cuate de cuidar bien la açariencia de estrdiante.
1) No, indudablemente. Pero eso no quiere decir que no se le pueda lucalizar, no?
2) Ko..
1) Bueno, que quiere prinero? De tomar tenemos nada mas eso: whiskey. Tenemos pan
dulce, queso, tortillitas de harina
2) Luy suave. Voy a pesar al baño.
1) Ahi, ahí.
1) Oye que pasó? Fuiste o no?
Tu no conccies aquí, verdad? Que te parece?
2) Easta cañana. Es de 7 a 8:30 de la cažena
1) Ymoarezrtygnings Do vas a ir..
1
2) Claro que sí.
SALINAS
!
•
1) Kira, boy me llamó un hermano de Series (ha) y me dijo que ne reportaba esto.
Habló Enteça, entonces que el puede ver todo estas cosas alla, en 15 días
Chichay
2) Si?
1) Pero primero, bueno, yo no quiere estar ad, no? Vava, si señana por alguna
circunstancia hay algun tipo de problema, este, contencs eso de ala, no?
2) Si, como no
(JACO3 RODRIGUEZ PADIA
1) Otra cosa, estoy contento, mano, porque le acabo de conseguir a un cuate de Centro-
Azerica, de Guatemala wwxxxxx que estaba ilegal una acta de hermano que ya
no servía porque está registrado dos veces. I hcy vine a la casa fara agradeceгие
pero yo no estaba.
Digo, a mi no me servia porque naturalmente tiene el acta el segundo mismo apellido.
2) fe acuerdas de lo que re platiceste hase 2 c 3 dias? Dende ya se aciararon muchas
cosas. Ya lo puse al tanto de la situación, Cuidado con esos cerillos, me costaron
1 peso.
1) En donie?
2) En el foot-ball.
1) Ya despues hablamos del foot-ball. Entonces, que, que pasó pues?
2) Puse a Paul, lo puse al tanto de lo hablamos hace unos días
whiskey, no shidkey con aqua, o seria whiskey solo...
....
este era agua con
1) To tomé una cantidad è esas cosas y por poco y me quero, caray.
Risa general y comenterio de el a Merit.
1) Yo en lo personal prefiero el onn.
2) Yo también.
2) Sueno, a chichuahua, que fuerte esta esto, do hace a uno toeer.
Kujer. Esto de whiskey con tortillas no va, verdad?
2) Andale, come.
1) Se conen con chile, frias.
2) Sueno Raul, no ne das mis cerillos, por favor? Entonces yo creo que la semana que
entra eso se hace.
1
من Cecias, Sergio, que ya le habías heblado a Raul?
:
!
Sergio- Si ya le hablé cuando nos vimos antier.
1) Bueno, mira, primero dame tus puntos de vista y luego te dor los zics, sobre lo
que estuvinos hablando, no?
Sergio. Lo vas importante, lo que yo creo mas importante en este momento, inmediato,
es lograr dos cosas que ya están en casino. El negocio de las flores y lograr el
negocio de Venezuela, de Caracas. Esas son des cosas fundamentales, de las que tenet
que partir çara cualquier acción que queramos tomar cas adelante.
1)
Sobre eso te quería decir algunas cosas. Es decir que me amplieres un poco mas
al respecto de la caners para hacer industrias y eso para que pudieramos ir juntos
Sergio. Si. Bueno, sobre todo en Caracas la forme ras facil que me cedo abfir peso
es contando un taller allá de vidrio que como te se dicho es muy importante en el
sentido comercial ya que allá no se conoce y jer deja una cantidad de dinero, pues,
apreciable, apreciable economicamente para la situación que queremos desarrollar?
lontar el negocio que será en unos cuantos neses
1) Ah, ya tengo el nombre completo
Sergio. Como se apellida?
1) Se llama GARCIA Kendez.
Sergio.- A ver, dejane apuntarlo, a ver que es?
1) GARCIA L'endez, Maria Edith (phơn)
.......
a Faria Edith
Sergio.- Bueno yo estaba ensando, bueno como creo que muestros recursos aun unidos no
son muchos, sobretodo por lo que a mi ne respecta, nuestros recursos economicos.,
que montar un negocio en Caracas, inmediatamente que esté dejando wia ganancia, que
es en cuanto salgan ya piezas, montar ya un negocio de importación y exportación,
1) De Ficar (??) nada mas?
Sergio.- No, de lo que haya que vender... de lo que tenga que vender Venesuela de artesia.
1.- Pero exclusivamente de artesanía.
Sergio. Sueno, digo, eso es lo que yo conozco.
1.- Pero también podría haber otras posibilidades que no fueran solamente artesanía, no?
Sergio.- Claro, yo creo que Raul te puede decir algo al respecto.
Raul. Es concretamente esto, no? i pedre tiene una fabrica de etiquetas.
1.- De etiquetas de que?
Raul.- Etiquetas de esas que traen los calcetines, ropa.
1.- Ah, las que traen de recios?
Raul.- Si, de točas, carcas, también de las de botellas de este tipo de loción, etc.
El importa etiquetas a toda Centrcamerica.
Sergio.- Exporta.
Paul.- Experta, perdón. El exporta etiquetas a Centroamerica. Ahora, a Guatemala, por
ejemplo, a todos los dezas paises. Allá no tienen esas cosas. Entonces comple-
rentando lo de Sergic, pues creo que es un buen conducto, o cuando nencs es
en etro aspecto ofrece ocasiones.
:
1.- Amine deja charlas un poco nas. Dico, ya con Sergio hablé el otro die bastante;
me izagino que ya te aclaró muchas cosas, que te planted michas cosas. A mi me
quedan ciertas cosas que quiero aclarar un poco cas. Digo, ya no quiero volver a
discutir lo querya esta discutido. En los principios parece que hubo una coinciden-
cia feliz porque por distintos carincs todos teniamos el mismo proposito. Ahora,
claro que el punto de partida de ustedes, digo, la enbajada, no me extraño, però si ze
sorprendió un porquito. Esto ya lo discutizos sucho y no quiere volver a entrar en ello.
Ahora, no se si Sergio ya te dijo que probablemente dentro de unos días, no se cuantos,
tal vez 15, pueda hacer yo un viaje a Caracas, porque el negocio de ficres plásticce
cono dije el otro día, el principal accionista reside en Caracas. Es el dueño de
todas las farricas Pai (con) en Venezuela y la de Guatemala. Pero fijate que cade
día salen cosas zas interesantes, no? Por ejemplo, el negocio de tu paçá: digo, la
exportación de etiquetas a Centroamerica es una nueva via. Digo, es una nueva
posibilidad, digancs, no? Ahora, lo que quisiera concretar ya mas es como podríanos
hacer ya realmente una cosa cas, pues concrets, mo? Sobre la marcha. Cuales son
las forzas, de acuerde ona ustedes, en que determinadas gentes de la sociedad que
propone Sergio.... Ah, te hago una aclaración. Yo le dije a Sergio que el sito de
cualquier tipo de trabajo de eta indole debe partir de una absoluta seguridad que
los medios de comunicación sean diganos, normales. Ya lo hablé mucho con el, pero a
tí de una vez de lo digo para hablar de estas cosas. Digo, debe ser un negocio
y normal y may solido, my solidamente establecido, porque à no hay problemas, no?
Ahora Sergio ye me habló de sus contactos en Venezuela, yo piendo que ahora que voy
no ir a ver a estas gentes rero si de todos modos me interesaría pues darme cuenta
hasta que panto tienen posibilidades, si no eccnomi.cas porque eso tendríamos nosotros
que resclverio, sino de influencias, relaciones, en fin, es ay importante todo esto.
Kirs, yo te hablé con franqueza el otro día, y yo creo que tu también ya lo sabes y
veo que tu ya no te chiveas Eso es muy bueno, no? Una últira cosa. Sobre los
contactos ya comerciales que tu tienes, Sergio, no me podfias dar algún detalle?
•
Sergio.- Juano, la ves anterior te mencionabe yo algo de ésto. De esto tengo yo que hablar
sobre terreno seguro. Te decía yo en aquella ocasión que tengo yo que primero
tener cosas concretas que ofrecer a éstas gentes. Yo estuve en contacto con
estas gentes, con gente que estuvo de pazo en Mexico hace ya bastantes meses,
ya año y zedio zas o rienos. Entonces la próxima vez que yo los busque, y que no
creo que sea dificil encontrarlos, quiero ya ofrecerlos cosas bien concretas.
Nosotros teneros conocimiento de sus necesidades a grosso modo.
1.- Yo te pregunto esto porque si fueron ustedes ya hasta instantos, a otras partes es
porque seguramente tienen ya por lo menos una idea ya bastante firme de lo que
cetas haciendo,.no?
Segio. Sueno, si, pero mira. Yo creo que cometinos algunos errores queriendo abarcar
muchas cosas. I querianos abarcar para pronto la cosa comercial y los contactos
revolucionarios. Creo que por el momento es un poco ambicioso, teniendo en cuenta
lcs pocos recursos economicos que tenemos, pues ni nodo.
1.- Pan
Sergio.- Claro, hay que cultivar a la activa las dos cosas, pero concretar el negocio
para que ellos puedan partir de una base.
!
Raul. Yo estaba pensando une cоза, Lo de la cuestión está de las etiquetas
esto
nos puede brindar una protección en el sentido de que puede unoj viajar a varios
paises con un pretexto muy bueno, no?
1.- Tu no nocas eres estudiante de Medicina, pero de Economia también, no?
Sergio.. (Faciendo burla) Confundes las exportaciones con las importaciones, eh?
i
Raul... Es un buen pretexto. Esta gente tiene exportando equetas cuando menos unes
10 años o mas. Eacen viajes periodicos sirve que tambien tienen entrada a un
yate papa aparentando une representación de tipo plenament comercial. For oira
parte yo creo que esto es un poco diferente; yo crec que es cien importante
cosprender que... y adenas tratar de hacerlo... de que no nomes los contactos
van a ser los desconfiados, no 31, mirs, cuando sencs tener una cierta išca
de que los ccatactos son desconfiados, no?
1.-
A que contactos te refieres?
Raul.- Bueno, los que logrenos establecer o los que estemos por establecer.
Sergio. Los revolucionarios.
1. Ah, bueno.
Raul.- Entonces creo que debemos partir de la idea de que hay que ser bien desconfiados,
no? Es decir lo primero que hay que meer hacer antes de llegar adelante., ser
desconfiado. En Mexico por una parte hay un contón de policias, por otra parte
hay un conten de vividores. Son tan perjudiciales unos como otros. Yo he
conccido cocos.de mate cuates que viven a todo Jujo, pretendiendo ser gentes
que estan aqui destacadas en algo, a parentando ciertas cosas viven perfectamente
bien, con grandes созаз y engañando a un conton de gente honesta. Entonces
ese es el problema también. Es ya una serie de pruebas muy elementales que mas
o menos pruesen a la gente esta. Que pueda uno cas o menos confiar on ella.
Yo creo que si nos ponemos a tomar indiscriminadamente contactos guatemaltecos
10. Si lo gritamos vienen corriendo. Entcaces yo creo que hay que tener mucho
cuidado con eso.
1.- Bueno. Algunas veces repito cosas porque cono nos hemos visto poco tu y yo
especialmente, o sea que lo veo mal. Ya Sergio te ha puesto en conccimiento de les
cosas que hemos hablado, no? pero vuelvo a hacer una aclaración. Yo estoy
trabajando con esa idea; el probleza que yo tengo que resolver empezará practica-
mente cuando empiece a funcionar ya la fábrica de flores plácticas aquí en lexice.
Digo, tenzo entendido que Lupe, que es la muchacha esta, tu amiga, esta trabajando
activamente en eso.
Raul. Así es.
1
1... Bueno, entonces espero, esperamos que en pocos días la licencia quede solucionada,
no? Ecy precisamente fuí a Industria y Comercio con ella, porque yo allfi tengo
muy buenos cuates tu cuñado, el Lic. LLAMAS DE la Industria de Plásticos..
Raul. Quien?
1.- Hugo LLANAS. A de trató estupendamente.
Mujer.- Si, es muy bueno.
1.- Fijate que incluso nos dijo que
:
el recibe en las tardes al público, pero caro
cozo Sergio lo llamó por telefono de alli de su oficina a la de ei y nos llevo
uh, pues nos trato de maravills. Y ademas ne dijo textual y hoy volvió a dċiz
así textual, que cualquier problema con Industria y Comercio no existe. Digo
en relación con esté asunto. Cualquier moblema el lo resuelve, no? Que el
único problema era Hacienda pero si Hacienda no tiene ningun problema tampoco.
entonces ya no hay ningun problema.
-
Sergio. Lo que nos dijo esta bien claro. Las mercancías de paso por Mexico no pagan
imjuesto. Y ese era todo el problema que hay.
1.- Ahora bien, para aclararte a ti ciertas cosas, Raul. En lo que respecta a mi perte
solamente hasta que este funcionando la fabrica de flores, ese es el momento en
que practicamente yo voy a empezar ya a trabajar en firme. Ahora, Sergio me
plantea una nueva, pero muy nueva y naganifica oportunidad, porque yo contactos
de ese tipo en Venezuela, pues serían el mismo señor Alvantis (phon), que el
bueno digamos, que existiera la fabrica allí en Venezuela, pues yo que iba a hacer
allí en ese sentido, no? Fero ya la diversificación de trabajo, es decir, los
contactos de Sergio allá, comerciales, me estoy refiriendo a ess, no? pues son
muy buenos, tengo entendido. Esta esta muchacha segm la carta que lei, que m
prestó el, se ve una persona de muchas posibilidades allá, y en principio yo si
creo