14-00000
104-10120-10376
i,
3
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SR/10-61-0066
Backgrou..d Use Only
• Do Not Reproduce
3 February 1961
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, Central Cover Group
ATTENTION
SUBJECT
:
:
Mr. Thomas Strange
Basic Proposal to Cover Field Assessment
of Potential REDSKIN Agent Candidates
1. A meeting was held 1 February 1961, to discuss the
feasability of conducting field assessment of potential REDSKIN
agent candidates by staff psychologists of the Assessment and
Evaluation Staff, OTR, under suitable(non-official) cover.
Conferees were Messeurs Thomas Strange and (John Lynch) of Central
Cover Group, John Gittinger of TSD, Dr.3 (James Lau) and Dr. John
Golder of the A&E Staff, OTR, and Fielder Dudley of SR/10. The
problem discussed in para 2 below was recognized and tentative
agreement reached on the basic proposal discussed in para 3
below.
:
2. Heretofore field assessments have been conducted by-
SR/10 case officers whose capabilities in the rather esoteric
science of psychological assessment are, at best, based funda-
mentally on intuition and subject to variable degrees of objec-
tivity. Furthermore these case officers reveal_their_Agency
connection on initial contact supported by credentials in alias.
Thus all agent candidates screened in the field become aware of
Agency interest to exploit legal travel to the USSR for Intelligence
purposes. These include a considerable percentage who are screened
out during the initial interview or subsequently as a result of
Headquarters assessment.
3. The Problem:
a. To screen out unsuitable REDSKIN agent candidates
without revealing Agency interest and to reduce possibilities
of irrational reaction, i.e., going to the press or writing'
letters to the President when later approached by an Agency
representative proposing an intelligence mission.
:
SR/10-61-0066 cont.
SUBJECT: Basic Proposal to Cover Field Assessment
of Potential REDSKIN Agent Candidates
Fackground Use Oly
Do Not Reproduos
b. To restrict revelation of SR Division safe apart-
ments, staff employees and general tasks germane to REDSKIN
operations only to those candidates most likely to be
accepted. for recruitment.
c. To cut down on the necessity of processing Provisional
Operational Approvals on all leads to be contacted for initial
on the Office of Security and the CI Staff by SR/10.
screening, thereby reducing the heavy workload now impl
4. Basic Proposal:
a. To send staff psychologists of the A&E Staff, OTR,
to conduct field assessments, when feasible, of potential
REDSKIN agent candidates, based on leads furnished by/SR/10's
spotter network, The staff psychologists will represent
themselves as employees or consultants of Psychological 24
Assessments Associates, a well established proprietary of
TSD, conducting Interviews on behalf of anonymcus but actual
clients in the fields of education, industry, commerce and
government (both federal and state). Other established
proprietary cover can be provided if and when appropriate.
The proprietary organizations can provide full "backstonping"
throughout every normal working day. Appropriate documenta-.
tion is to be provided in true name or alias, whichever is
appropriate in any particular case.
:
b. As a test run, twelve potential REDSKIN agent
candidates in the New England area have been selected for
initial contact and assessment by Dr. John Golder as soon
as this proposal has been concurred in and approved. Candi-
dates in the Midwest are tentatively scheduled for screening
by Dr. James Lau) during the latter half of February.
03
c. Those agent candidates recommended as likely prospects
by the staff psychologists will then be contacted by SR/10
case officers, when Provisional Operational Approvals have
been granted, who will ascertain willingness and availability
for travel in the USSR on intelligence missions. When
response is affirmative each candidate will be invited to
Washington for full Headquarters assessment and possible
recruitment.
2
-
SR/10-61-0066 cont.
SUBJECT:
Basic Proposal to Cover Field Assessment
of Potential REDSKIN Agent Candidates
sound Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
5. Earliest consideration of this proposal is requested
so that the time consumming screening and processing of suitable
REDSKIN agents can be accomplished in time for utilization during
the 1961 travel season.
6. Any questions concerning this proposal should be directed
to Fielder Dudley, SR/10, extension 8297.
-
3
HOWARD OSBORN
Deputy Chief, SR Division
-

