14-00000
104-10183-10054
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
!
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: AMWHIP/1 Meeting, New York City, 23 October 1962
1. Meeting Time/Place. Subject was contacted by letter (see
file) requesting a meeting. He answered in the affirmative
by letter to the assigned accommodation address. The under-
signed subsequently went to New York on 23 October, contacted
Subject by telephone at his office, and arranged for a meeting
at 1330 at The Forum restaurant, on 48th between 5th and 6th
Avenues. The contact took place without difficulty. After
lunch, Subject and the undersigned went to the former's office
in order to verify some information related by Subject at lunch.
The undersigned left Subject's office (see file) at 1610 and
returned by air directly to Washington.
2. Purpose of Meeting. To maintain contact with Subject, pay
hin the sum of $400.00 to cover the remainder of expenses incurred
by Subject in the AMLASH recruitment last summer in Furope, and
to determine additional information as described below in this
report.
3.
Travel and Financial Arrangements.
A. Travel. Subject stated that he was willing to meet with
the undersigned or another representative in New York, Washington
or any other city...whichever would prove most convenient for us.
He stated that business was a little slow just now, and as a result,
did not mind any reasonable travel to effect meetings. We thanked
him for this consideration, and stated that perhaps in the future,
this might prove most helpful to us.
B. Finances. Subject was paid the sum of $400.00, which he
accepted in lieu of some $409.00 as stated above. A receipt was
obtained. This amount represents $299.20 for hotel bills and inci-
dental expenses in Paris for Subject and AMWHIP/1, and the balance
for a plane ticket for AMLASH Prague-Paris and return.
4.
Contact Arrangements. Subject was instructed to continue
using the accommodation address he has been provided (see Subj'a
file) in the event he wishes to communicate with the undersigned or
his office. He has been informed that it may not be possible for
the undersigned to be in contact with him for several months, but
that he would be contacted by another member of my office. This
person would continue to write to Subject signing the letters "0111
Thompson", and will identify himself in the event of any telephone
calls as a "friend of Bill Thompson's". Arrangements for meeting
can be made by letter, telephone, or a combination thereof.
1
-2-
Personal Meetings. Subject is willing to meet anyplace
or time (within reason) with the undersigned or a representa-
tive from this office. The case officer should introduce
himself as a "friend of Bill Thompson's" and be prepared to
produce his half of the physical bona fide (attached herewith)
upon request from Subject. The bona fide is one-half of a
yellow typewriter delivery ticket, upon which have been drawn
two approximately parallel lines made in Subject's presence.
It is noted that Subject probably will not ask for this, judging
from past experience with him. Please, also note that Subject
does know the undersigned by his true name, so that after initial
use of the name "Bill Thompson" as the recognition phrase, use
the true name of the undersigned in discussions.
In order to aid the case officer in spotting him (although
pictures of Subject are available in his file) Subject has been
instructed to make the meeting carrying a copy of TIME magazine
folded in half with the cover outward.
5. Itens of Interest.
*
Berma
Frame
06
A. AMLASII/1's PAA Girl Friend. AMWHIP was not able to give
us the full name of the French-born, Miami-based Pan-American
stewardess who is, according to Subject, a very good friend of
AMLASH, and the one whom AMIASH was trying to get to come over to
Paris last August. Subject did know, however, that her first
name was Loretta, and promised to call Miami to determine her
family name. This, he will mail to us at the accommodation address.
The party in Miami that Subject will contact for this purpose is
Sylvia Vilarello, of 3502 SW 15th St. Miami. The relationship of
Subject with this girl (Sylvia) is not clear to us, but he made it
obvious that discretion would be appreciated in the matter.
B. Alternate AMLASH/1 Commo Channel. We advised Subject,
in answer to his question, that we had heard from ANLASH, but that
his reply had not been very satisfactory and more important, he
had not provided an address at which he was to receive mail from
Upon hearing this, Subject volunteered
03 "Jaime" (Earl Williams
[
06,10
106,10
that he had learned from several sources that AMLASH had visited
them on four occasions asking if they had any word from Subject
for.him. These were Subject's cousin, Ivan (also spelled Yuan)
GONZALEZ ("Fomento 608 Palatino Cerro Havana") and Marcelino
(Marzo) Artine Vega (603-ot or 605 Subj forgets which) Katrada Palma
entre Mayia Rodriguez y Sola Stos Suarez")! He asked the former
three times, the latter, once. Subject says he trusts both men
explicitly, and has used them before to get letters handcarried
to AMLASH. The "courier" from the States in this case 18
Bordo an an old friend of Subject's and long-time employce of the
Italian Embassy in Havana Bordo kets the leters in Miami either
from Subject himself or from another trusted friend of Subject.
06, Mulgel Gallo (telephones TU 3-3324 and TC 7-5307, the first being
06,1
08
han office, the nocond, his hone)
7
08,10
06
06
BR
-3-
Considering the need now to maintain contact with "assets"
in Cuba, we asked Subject to write a letter immediately to
AMLASH/1 and including in it the fact that his girl friend in
Madrid wants to write to him but does not have his address and
to please provide it as soon as possible. By this message,
AMLASH should send an accommodation address to his Madrid drop
quickly, that is, if he intends to keep in touch with us.
by the above actions of AMLASH, we are inclined to give him
the benefit of the doubt, and feels that perhaps he did actually
forget to provide a return address in his SW letter to Madrid.
In any case this will give us an opportunity to test his true
Judging
inclinations. It is noted that the "courier", Ricardo BORDO 06
was supposed to come to Miami on the 20th of October, but did not
appear. The next time he could be expected was, according to
GALLO about the end of this month. Travel restrictions_imposed
by the Crisis might defeat this plan. It is noted that BORDO此
usually cables GALLO before he comes to Miami.
706
03 с.
Operational Lead. Subject stated that he had discussed
with Williams last August the possibility that one "Mago" ROBRENO
might be recruitable. He stated that he personally Idid not like
ROBRENO as a person, but felt that he would be a good action asset
to have on our side. He had no BI on [ROBRENO other than the fact 06
that he was, or is, a captain in the Army and is a lawyer-by
believed (ROBRENO was at one time involved in a bar-room brawl with
an American citizen, whom he shot to death. Subject stated that
bellated (ROBRENOther Journalistiese stated that he
AMLASH/1 also did not personally care for (ROBRENO. 06
D. Subject's Recent Visit to Miami. Subject said he was in
Miami recently for some time (about a week) on business, and also
saw and talked to AMCONCERT/1 and Lucia Echevarria. He said he
told them the story he was told to tell, 1.0., that he had seen
AMLASH/1 for some days in Europe, but had not succeeded in convinc-
ing AMLASH to leave Cuba. He said that he told them that AMLASH
felt that he was uncertain about a future away from Cuba and that,
although he didn't necessarily approve of the way the regime was
handling things in Cuba, he felt that he had best remain there, and
attempt to help Cuba to a better future in his own way and not to
fight, per se, against the regimo, but rather try to live with it.
Subject was told about the statement by AMLASH in his letter that
"...his intimate friend had made a very indiscrete phone call to
Havana...". Subject said he was not sure whether LASIH meant by this
Lucia Echevarria or Sylvia VILARELLO.. He said he would look into
this and attempt to find out who it war and what was said.
E. Subject Volunteers Services. Subject offered to return to
Havana for us If need be. If we could but guarantes his mafo exit.
Wo thanked him and said that, although wo folt he could do the most
good out of Cuba Just now, wo would keep the offer in mind. lle
ucesed pleased by thin.
IOIBR
-4-
F. Roberto ECHEVARRIA, Commercial Secretary, Ottawa. Subject
said he had met E. only once and that was in Canada during his trip
there last summer just before he went to Helsinki and Paris for the
AMLASH operation. He said he didn't know where E. was just now,
but thought he was jot in Canada. We asked him to discreetly ask
his business partner, who was making a trip to northern New York
State and/or Canada this weekend, to make a phone call to the
Commercial Mission in Ottawa, and to inquire for E., and/or when
he would be back, etc., if in fact he was not there. He can use
Subject's name or an alleged business matter as the pretext for
calling. He will advise us on the outcome.
G. Pending Trip to Colombia. Subject stated that he planned
to make a trip in the near future to Columbia to buy some emeralds.
He will arrange the trip in order to avoid being away from home
on 7 November, the anniversary of his brother's death, and which
day he understandably wishes to be with his mother and father. The
undersigned is not absolutely sure of this date, but if it is not
correct, it is not far off. A check of our files might clarify this
point.
H. Passports for Sale. Subject said he had recently bought
two Cuban passports in Miami for two friends in Switzerland, whose
passports had run out of pages. Subject is concerned over this
market in passports and stressed the point to us. He said he paid
$50.00 apiece for them. The wholesale price is $25.00, Subject
informed us. He said he would be glad to get some for us if we
desired. We said we would advise him. He did not know whether
he could get any diplomatic passports or not, but he would discreetly
check on this. Passports are availed used or blank. He thinks the
blanks are the real McCoy and not poor imitations.
6. SECURITY Considerations. There were no incidents of a security
nature to report. The undersigned had coffee in Subject's offices
while the latter made a call to Miami re BORDO's expected visit to 06
Miami. We chatted briefly with Subject's father and one of the
partners. No questions were asked of the undersigned whatsoever,
and the conversation was polite only.
BR

