104-10177-10181
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRE
21286382
8 00 1964
REPORT OF COVERT ASSESSMENT
NOTE: This Report of Covert Assessment is entrusted to CIA/WH/SA.
It may be retained in the operational personnel file. In the
event further interpretation or the information provided on this
individual is desired, please contact the Assessment and Evaluation
Staff, MS, extension 3247.
Name: Victor PANEQUE Batista
Date of Birth: 13 September 1920
Official Requesting Assessment:
Projected Job Assignment: PM/I
COMMENTS:
1. Mr. PANEQUE was one of six members of the radop trainees
who were given brief psychological assessments on 5-13 August 1964.
They were given a group battery of ability tests, checked personality
questionnaires, and each was interviewed for at least an hour.
2. The test battery consisted of a series of measures of
non-verbal intellectual abilities, involving principally the perception
of relationships between objects and symbols and the
manipulation of numbers and numerical concepts. While this battery
has not been used extensively with Cuban groups, experience with
it elsewhere suggests its usefulness in predicting adaptability to
the intellectual demands of training. On the attached forms,
Mr. PANEQUE's name appears on a scale which shows his performance
relative to other Cubans tested to date.
3. Mr. PANEQUE is the oldest, least intelligent, and most
experienced member of the radop group. The tests indicate that he
has little ability to deal with abstract or symbolic aspects of
a problem. Thus, training aids will be of little value to him;
rather, actual work on the equipment and considerable time for
practice will be necessary to master the basic skills. He is a
rather simple man who, through circumstances, managed to attain a
position of command and prestige. His past success appears due
more to his outgoing, massive, and self-confident manner than
to intellectual abilities. Whether he will be willing to assume a
subordinate position on a team is doubtful. In fact, it is quite
likely that he could and would attempt to dominate and control any
team leader who has not had the experience and positions of leadership
that he (PANEQUE) has had in the past. Moreover, he seems to
be a rather independent individual who might engage in activities
either on his own or in behalf of some organization not sponsored
by KUBARK. All-in-all, his shortcomings tend to outweigh his
assets.
Dates of Assessment: 5-13
August 1964
Education: 4-5th grade level
Bob Wall, JMWAVE
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
Milton K. Ramirez 03
Assessment Section St
Medical Div.
201 286 322
удо