14-00000
104-10105-10298
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
125-05611
09075.0316
Executive Regiay
75-4470
24 January 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE RECORD
SUBJECT
: Howard Hunt's Letter to Gene Fodor
[tome]
1. Attached hereto is a note from Gene Fodor submitting a copy
of a letter he received from Howard Hunt relative to the New York Times
story which identified Gene Fodor as a CIA agent.
2. In a telephone conversation during the week of 13 January
1975 with CCS/COB, Gene Fodor reported receipt of the letter and
expressed his desire to write an answer to Mr. Hunt. It is Mr. Fodor's
opinion that the answer should point out to Mr. Hunt that the release
of such information could do great harm to Mr. Fodor's relatives in
Czechoslovakia. This same theme is repeated in Mr. Fodor's trans-
mittal letter where he asks for an Agency opinion on how to proceed.
3. In answer to Mr. Fodor, CCS/COB telephoned him on 23 January
and gave the opinion that a simple acknowledgment letter was the best
course of action if he insisted upon giving some type of answer to
Mr. Hunt. CCS/COB discouraged Mr. Fodor in his answer to Mr. Hunt
from dealing with any of the subjects raised in Mr. Hunt's letter,
and Mr. Fodor made the comment that perhaps a simple sterile acknow-
ledgment would suffice. It is CCS/COB's opinion that he will proceed
along those lines.
4. Mr. Fodor is concerned about possible testimony before a
Senate committee, as suggested in Mr. Hunt's letter. He says that
he has forgotten a number of facts about his Agency relationship,
and wonders if he will have an opportunity to review files or receive
a briefing in the event that he must testify. CCS/COB said that we
would have to deal with that whole problem at such time as he was
called to testify.
5. Mr. Fodor has received inquiries from many places in the
world where his books are read and sold, and he claims that his
cooperation with the Agency has already been announced on the radio
in Czechoslovakia. This latter fact is of great concern to him
because he fears that something will happen to his relatives in
2
101953
that country. One favorable note is that the British owners of his
company do not seem to be exercised or upset about the news release.
Hilan
William H. Koehler
Chief, CCS/COB
Attachment:
h/w
13 Jan 75 letter from
Howard Hunt & Fodor's note
CCS/COB/WHKoehler:db
Distribution:
Orig - DDO then return to C/CCS and CCS/COB
1 FODOR File (201-234047)
1
-
1
Chrono
Reading Board
2
80X 784
LITCHFIELD, CONNECTICUT 6759
OFFICE OF THE EDITOR
(203) JO 7-8784
dear Bia,
here is a copy & H's Cotier. Istri foel, I ongarto
let lieu Huos Row he endangered the safety of huy
fauiily isth his revelatidis, if only to prevent fusttier
disclosures of othe public controversy.
I could tone cloron my remarke by grosig lieve credit
for sind realizing. I stiti kad saving ties Reliced the
Iron Curtain...
Please, lot the Recow ichal you their.
thaidri sua
HOWARD HUNT
13 January 1975
Mr. Eugene Fodor
Litchfield, Connecticut
Dear Mr. Fodor:
I want you to know that I greatly regret the em-
barrassment caused you by the New York Times' revelation
of my executive session testimony given in confidence to
the Ervin Committee more than a year ago. Senator Baker
and Minority Counsel Thompson gave me assurances that I
was authorized to reveal classified CIA matters to the
Select Committee, and I did so on the assumption that the
testimony would not be publicly revealed.
A UPI story of today's date quotes you as stating
that you and I never met, or had any dealings, and that of
course is not accurate.
Unless the Agency has destroyed the files of all CIA
projects with which I was involved there should be a re-
cord of at least one meeting between you and me at a CIA
safe office in Washington's Barr Building. I mention this
by way of refreshing your memory, for I expect that both of
us may be summoned before the CIA Investigating Committee
within the near future.
Again, it was not my desire that you suffer in any
way because of your relationship with CIA and our late
mutual friend, Charlie. Leaking classified information is
both illegal and reprehensible whether done by Daniel
Ellsberg or a Senate Committee staff member; it also seems
to be a non-prosecutable offense, particularly when the
recipient is the New York Times.
Sincerely,
Morand Bust
cc: William A. Snyder, Jr., Esq.
Baltimore, Maryland

