14-00000
104-10188-10032
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
19 June 1963
SUBJECT: Renewal of Project LIFEAT for FY 1964
The attached LIFEAT Project Renewal Request, as prepared
in project outline form by the Mexico City Station, is
forwarded for approval.
1. Objectives:
The objective of this project is to provide,
through a unilateral telephone tap operation, information
on the activities of selected individuals and groups in
response to both Station needs and Headquarters requests.
2. Agents:
8. LIEMBRACE-8 who normally functions under the
MKCHARITY Project was actively employed in the technical
--phase of the operation during the home leave period of
principal outside case officer, David M. WILSTED.
b. During the past project year, 5 indigenous
basehouse keepers were dropped from the project. LIFEUD-14
and LIFEUD-17, a married couple, decided on separation and
eventual divorce, thus making the continuance of their
basehouse keeping duties impossible. LIFEUD-22 and LIFEUD-23,
son and mother, occupy a basshouse that was originally
intended to be used for LIFEAT but is being used only in
another operation. LIFEUD-27 was granted a POA during
the project year but was never recruited.
c. Three now agents have been employed since the
last project ronowal. LIFEUD-24 is an old friend of
VILSTED's who will be used as a basehouse keeper and trans-
lator along with LIFEUD-26 who is his wife. LIFEUD-25,
the wife of LIFEUD-4 had been included in her husband's
clearance but has now received her own clearance as a
basehouse keeper.
3. Changes:
a.
Other than the personnel changes described in
paragraph 2 above, there were no organizational changes in
the project in the past project year. At this time no
14-00000
-2-
organizational changes can be forseen for the coming project
year.
b. Funds requested for FY 1964 total $83,808
compared to $99,000 granted for use in 1963. A great part
of the reduction of $15,192 is due to the fact that the
Station programmed no new equipment purchases for the
coming year.
4. Intelligence Production:
Although the emphasis of the LIFEAT Project is
on Station operational support, the project through May 1963
was totally or partially responsible for 31 positive infor-
mation reports of which 29 were disseminated. Of the
disseminations, 13 involved the activities of Juan Jose
AREVALO Bermejo or his followers,
5.
Effectiveness:
The LIFEAT Project is a model telephone tap
operation. During the last project year LIFEAT continued
to actively support the operations of the Station by
providing leads and information on selected targets.
In addition to this mission the project provided on a
regular basis valuable information on active Soviet intell-
igence officers, the Polish and Yugoslav official instal1-
ations and personnel, selected Cuban personnel (10 lines),
American Communists in Mexico, Mexican leftists and, exile
groups in Mexico. In the latter field the intensive
coverage of Juan Jose AREVALO Bermejo was particularly
revarding. It is believed that the support provided other
Station operations, the CI/CE information and leads, the
ability of the unilateral LIFEAT operation to cover sensi-
tive targets without revealing Station interests to the
Mexican Government, well justify the exponditure of funds,
time, personnel and the security risk.
6. Problems:
In the past year as in the past few years the
greatest problems have concerned the security of the operation
and equipment. The current problems conter on two devel-
opments:
a. The Mexico City telophone system is continually
being modernized. Installation of new underground
cables replacing the old overhead lines reduce access
to target lines. The Telephone Company is keeping
14-00000
SECRET
-3-
closer track of the assignments of its telophone
linemen thereby reducing the mobility of the LIFEAT
linomen. The Station has managed to somewhat negate
the first of these problems by making its tap cros808
in the telephone centrals.
b. A government investigation which is under
way allows investigating crows to enter any distri-
bution box and check back on any connection in the
box to see if it is actually in use. On one occasion
a team rang back on a spare which was being used by
LIFEAT.
A11 LIFEAT personnel have been trained to take
whatever action would be nocenary to prevent, or negate
the effects of a security flap. For details of the
problems faced and the procautions taken by the Station,
soo paragraph 14 of the attached Project Outline.
7. Liaison:
Not applicable
8. Interagency coordination:
Not applicable
9. Plans:
It is planned that LIFEAT will as in the past
provide valuable information on a continuing basis on top
priority targets and at the same time remain flexible
enough to be employed in support of other Station projects
against targets of opportunity. LIFEAT has the capability
of roactivating its coverage on the important targets now
being covered by the semi-liaison LIENVOY Project if the
latter should have to be discontinued for any reason.
10.
Funda:
Sufficient funds have been programmed in the WH
Division's FY 1964 budget for the LIFEAT Project.
11. Recommendations:
It is requested that Project LIFEAT be approved
for FY 1964, 1 July 1963 through 30 June 1964, la the
amount of $83,808.

