14-00000
104-10171-10012
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
2
INFO
DISPATCH
Chief, Task Force r
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
3P
PROCESSING
AW
ACTAW
ACCOM
PLISHED
RED
AW
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Operational/GYROSE KUCAGE/AMHINT/RUTUBE
Debriefing of AMHINT Safehouse Owner
ANTAN REQUIRED REFERENCES
Action: FYI and files
Ref : WAVE 3911
dr berifing
CAR ATLUE INCE
ABSTRACT
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
041. On 24 May 1962, At At about 1230 hours local, JMWAVE debriefed
Heriberto LEON Rodriguez for general pw aspectsoland confirmation of the
Independent infiltration operation of ANHINT-53 and ANHINT-40 by the
Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil (DRE) on 20 May 1962.
b7c8.
06.06
2. Subject was born 23 December 1905 in_Jovellanes, Province of
Matanzas, Cuba son of Juan LEON and Mario RODRIGUEZ. His address in
Cuba was Calle 36, Sur Varadero, Matanzas Province. In Miami, he is
temporarily residing a 42238 SW 1st St., Miami. Subject does not
plan to return to Cuba during the present Pegime.
3. LEON is representative of the middle-class, small town Cuban
official with moderate polticalginterest and ultimately conservative
and Pro-PBPRIME. He was mayor of Manguito Matanzas Province from
1954 to 1958, a period during which the BATISTA regime both flourished
and declined, although subject does not profess to be "Batistiano".
He probably contributed very little to the opposition of BATISTA and
by the same token contributed very little to the opposition of CASTRO.
He is currently owner of the small dwelling at the above address and
has loaned the shelter and facilities to AMHINT personnel but without
RECLASES FIE
Distribution:
3-C/TFW
SA/MAS
M
RESTRICTED TO SAS/MCG/PA-PROP
Remove From Project Am
0103-105/58
Боки 13 ro: /
JUN 111962
INDEX
CROSS REFEX
CS C
CLASSIFICATION
19-134-26/3
DATE TIPED
19-
DATE DESPATCHED
30 May 1962 JUN 1562
DISPATION SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-4216
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-19/3
S-E-C-R-E-T
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
S-E-C-R-E-T
UFGA-4216
participating in their operations. This was done more for reasons
of family ties and sympathetic attitude toward student activities that
is traditional in Cuba. Needless to say, however, this is a modest
declaration on his part since the type of aid he had been lending with
out reservation is punishable by death or imprisonment for all or
any members of his immediate family.
4. Subject related the events of 20 May in his small beach
resort village as follows:...
:
"At about 10:00 P.M. on Sunday, 20 May, he and his family had
returned to their house, which is located about three blocks from the
Parque Infantil INIT where the townfolk were dancing and celebrating
this traditional date. Shortly after arriving, they heard gunfire
in the general direction of the beach. This was described as mixed
automatic fire and single shots. There was much shouting and confusion
in the streets of the town near the park, and LEON was just about to
venture out and learn the source of the disturbance when AMHINT-530
appeared in the doorway, dripping wet and panting. Behind him, was
AMHINT-40,"
04
"After recognition and exchange of explanations, CELERON Unpacked onc
of the family suitcases for dry clothing and sent the two boys into
their bathroom to change and remain concealed until the commotion died
down.... The LEON) family were departing Cuba and had their home prepared
for closure and processing with local militia post as required by
revolutionary decree. After the two ANHINTswere settled, LEON left
his house and went out to send the pre-arranged coded cable to Miami
confirming their safe arrival. They slept in his house that night and
departed early Monday morning for Havana."
04
"Although the LEON family has a reputation for political indifference
precautions were made for travel in which the two-man team traveled
half way to Havana in another vehicle and changed to the LEON car for
the remainder of the trip and installation in a Havana safehouse."
064
"Prior to departure Varadero, however, LEON had to visit the
Militia Post to turn over the keys to his house and process his de-
parture. During a forty-minute wait there, he overheard conversations
among the officers. From these conversations, it was apparent that
the Militia patrol encountering the beach operation reported the clash
as "escapees": that two or more were killed and the bodies taken with
the other escapees: that there were no militia casaulties: that there
was no inkling that an infiltration operation had taken place prior
to the patrol encounter."
"When queried as to militia casualties since the DRE had reported
that at least two had been "dropped" on the beach, subject commented
that 'one does not shoot a militiaman down that easy. That they
were just dropping to the ground at the slightest sign of action'.
LEON was certain that if as much as one man had been scratched the
whole town would have known about it by morning."
04
5. LEON was very vague and lacked details concerning his knowledge
of propaganda in Cuba. He recalled that the radio program with Juan
AMADOR Rodriguez on longwave at midday was popular and heard by many
of the townfolk. He remarked that they listen to a 5:00 AM and 12:00
noon shortwave program coming from Key West, and finally, that the
Voice of America shortwave broadcasts were very effective in his
region. He never tuned in to Radio Las Americas and instantly associated
it with the former "Radio Swan" repeating the usual hearsay that "it
was discredited".
536
ASCATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
Y
CON100ED
19-124-26/3
PAGE NO
2
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
S-E-C-R-E-T
UFGA-4216
6. Although subject was obviously not a good source for military
OB or other intelligence observations, he did provide some fragmentary
information on his area. He described a place known as Lomas Finas,
located between Cardenas and Coliseo (10 miles South) pointed out on
the map to be about 22568-81188. There is a Militia Post there with
about 500 and 600 stationed there for short periods.. He observed some
tank movement, about six to eight tanks traveling in and out of this
area at a time, but could not describe them as to type or size. He
described the militia personnel in this region as a "Very low type"
of Cuban which was disgusting to the local country people and there
was continuous friction. He commented that it was just such camps or
post as this that turned the general population into oppositionists.
7. About 17 or 18 May, subject observed a large freighter unload-
ing cargo in Matanzas harbor. The local people described it as Russian
and subject could not confirm or deny this. The shipment was large,
however, and in various size crates that were trucked out of the dock
area in large convoys.
8. Near a village known as Palmillas (2238N-8045W) about 10 miles
Southeast of Colon, Province of Natanzas, subject reports that there
are two guerrilla bands of twelve to twenty men each. During 15 to 17
May, these bands attached farms occupied by militia, killing one
militiaman and running the others off the farm. They burned the house,
barns and destroyed the farm equipment.
9. Again on the 18th of May, one of these bands attacked another
militia post and killed one militia. This particular incident came from
the doctor who treated the militiaman prior his death and who is a
personal friend of LEON.04
10. Subject concluded the interview with some of his opinions
and observations concerning the state of public morale in Cuba today.
He pointed out that much of the population, the "better people" of
the country, understood the United States position on Cuba. (The
implication being the reason for United States failure to take direct
action or intervention in Cuba.) He said the people understand that
CASTRO is their own doing and that the United States cannot be held
responsible for his presence. He described the greater part of the
populace as sick and tired, undernourished, disgusted with blatant
propaganda lies, terrorized by repression but ultimately disposed to
resist at all costs. That if arms were generally available among the
populace, especially rifles and ammunition for them, CASTRO would have
been overthrown by now, without a bit of outside help. That the farmers
and some city folk, in desperation, leave their homes to join the
guerrilla bands with no hope for supply and many times turned down by
guerrilla leaders who cannot supply their own band as it is.
Subject
departed with the reminder that the "Cubans traditionally prefer to
live good or not live at all."
リ
01
.::
105 530
اله
END OF DISPATCH
ASSFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
19-124-06/3
PAGE NO
CONTINUED
3