14-00000
104-10210-101432023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DB MOMO #6585
3 January 1964
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, WE/2
ATTENTION:
SUBJECCT:
REFERENCE:
Mr. Charles P. Kiteley
Technical Analysis of Letter and Envelope
DB CASE #4361
WE/2 Memo dated 13 December 1963
1. In response to referenced request, an original typewritten
letter and envelope addressed to the American Embassy, Stockholm,
were examined in order to determine the origin of the letter and the
nationality of the writer.
2. The following conclusions were drawn concerning the letter
and envelope:
a. The typewriter in question is equipped with an obsolete
style of German-made type which, according to our references, was
fitted on a number of typewritere made in Germany during the 1920s
and early 1930s. The possible makes would be Stoever, Torpedo,
Mercedes, Rheinmetall, Urania, Orga, Fortuna, Continental, Kappel,
Groan, Triumph, Merz and possibly sme others. Of these makes,
the Torpedo, Mercedes, Rheinmetall and Triumph were probably the
most widely distributed.
b. The machine in question is equipped with a black and red
ritton. The keyboard is very probably Swedish, as shown by two
strike-overs: umlaut-u for hyphen and "z" for "a". Thesе
characters are adjacent on the standard Swedish keyboard, but not
on the German. The umlaut-a was not used in the street address,
"Strandvagen" (where the dots should have been placed over the
second "a"). This might be either a simple oversight or an attempt
to conceal the writer's familiarity with the correct spelling.
c. The paper of the letter is of the international standard
(DIN) size "Al" which is almost universally used in Sweden. The
linen-textured stationery seems to be rather common in Sweden.
The two smaller pieces of blank paper match the letter paper with
respect to width, thickness, color, texture and look-through, and
vere probably cut from another sheet of the same type. The envelope
matches specimens of Swedish envelopes taken from DB/5-Postal.
Intelligence files.
Sucrar
:
14-00000
DB Memo #6585 - Page 2
d. The letter was posted from the Stockholm Ean post office,...
which is located in the central railway terminal in Stockholm.
All mail deposited in street mail boxes in this area or in the post
office would be processed tarough this station.
e. The cancellation cachet on the enveloje is identical in
all respects (format, postmark, number style and length of killer
bars) to exemplars available in our office.
f. The postage is correct for Svedish internal mail and the
postage stamp is of current issue.
B. A possible irregularity is the time lag between the internal
date of the letter, the date of the postmark and the date of receipt
in the American Embassy. The total time from the internal date of
the letter to the time of receipt is eight days, the time between
the date of posting and the date of receipt is more than three days.
This transit tims of more than three days for intra-city mail appears
irregular when compared with the average transit tize of only two-
three days for arrival between Stockholm and the United States.
3. The text of the letter warrants some comments because a number
of peculiarities were noted aside from mure spelling or typing errors
which seem to indicate a Swedish writer. The following voris represent
either Swedish spelling or modification: "reserv", "etablished", "warded",
"Krustjev". Other examples of Swedish grammar and syntax would be:
"must" (as past tense), 'in Soviet" (Swedish form but not spelling),
"he vas spy" (without indefinite article), "FBI, USA" (vithout definite
article), "should" (rather than "would"), "outamuggled" (Swedish past
participle form), and "whole the world" (pure Swedish form).
4. Another significant detail is the name given, Ryo Liang Yuan".
"Ryo" is not a standard spelling in any known Romanization system used
for Chinese. "R" is seen in the new Chinese Communist cational system,
but never in combination with "yo". "Ryo" is a Japanese spelling. In
the name given it is not known whether the Chinese or western presen-
tation is used, in other words, whether 'Ryo" or "Yuan" is meant to be
the surname. Among Chinese syllables which could be represented by the
Japanese "Ryo" are Liso, Liang and Lung. Of these Lung (TC:7893) and
Liang (TC:2733) are used as Burnames. In either case, Ryo" is hardly
a name by which a real Chinese vould identify himself.
5. In summary, and based on the above information, it is concluded
that the letter vas transmitted via normal Swedish postal channels. The
letter is probably a "crank letter", most likely written by a Swede,
using a Swedish-keyboard typewriter and Swedish stationery.
:
14-00000
DB Memo #6585 - Page 3
6. For further informetion concerning the typewriter and paper
anelyses, and the Swedish style of language usage, contact Mr. Jan
Beck on x2009. For further information on the spelling of the
ostensible writer's name, you may contact Mr. Cerald Worth on x2608.
For further information regarding the lostal aspects of this case,
please contact Mr. Robert H. Banks on x2303.
7. The original letter and envelope are being returned herewith.
Attachment: (1)
As stated
Distribution:
2
Orig & 1 Addressee
TSD/GARB/A&R
1-TSD/DB/3
1 DB files
1 PI chrono
1
Case 4361
TSD/DB/5-PI/RHBanks/x2303/ery
ALBIN R. TRECIOKAS
Chief, TED/DB
1
14-00000
SECRET
20148-X
13 DEC 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: TSD/DB/5
ATTENTION: Mr. Tom Campbell
SUBJECT: Technical Analysis of Letter and Envelope
1. Attached is a letter mailed to the American Embassy in
Stockholm purportedly from an officer in the Chinese Communist
Embassy in Stockholm. Also included is the envelope and a plain
folded sheet of paper which presumably was used to enfold the
letter within the envelope. Please perform a technical analysis
of these attachments to determine whatever can be determined
concerning the origin of the paper, envelope, typewriter, and
ink used. If you have any capability for comparing this letter
with other correspondence originating with the Chinese Comunist
Embassy in Stockholm, we would like your opinion on whether or
not the stationery, typewriter, and envelope are of the type
normally used by that Embassy.
2. Because of the sensational nature of the contents of
the letter and the necessity for our checking out such allega-
tions as quickly and thoroughly as possible, it is requested
that this technical analysis be undertaken on a priority basis
and that the undersigned by notified by phone as soon as any
conclusions are reached..
3. Please acknowledge the receipt of the attached letter
and ensure that its whereabouts, when in your custody, is a
matter of record. We prefer that the letter and envelope be
kept as intact as possible while undergoing technical analysis.
SECRET
Charles P. Kiteley
WE/2 x7659
6RCUP 1
Exclated from sutamatic
Coengrating and
Ceciass ficatica
4361
14-00000
THIS IS VERY ILPORTANT AND NOT A BAD JOKE!
25/11-63.
The Fresident of the United States of America, John F Kennedy was
assassinated by Lee H Oswald by direct order of the government of
the Peoples Republic of China. Lee H Oswald executed the act alone
but there was helpers and reserv. "Now all is over" was password
to his customers. Oswald was a fully convinced Communist but he
must assassinate Kennedy. We etablised contact with Oswald already
when he was in Sowiet but then to try to get him as a spy for China.
Later he was spy for us. When Lee il Oswald had returned fo USA we
contacted him anew and freshened up his mind "you have been a spy
for us" and told him what could happen to him if FBI got informed.
Now we had him. He got his last information in Lexico. It was not
good to assassinate Kennedy in Lexico/ "Fair Play for Cuba" was
started only to confuse and throw the blame on Castro for the as-
ssassinated. Our government thought that USA should attack Cuba
when- Kennedy was murded as the orginaztion was behind the assassin-
ation. When Cuba was attacked by USA Sowiet must help Castro defend
himself. It that was so it would burden. Sowiet that Oswald had visi-
ted. We should be allieted with Sowiet then we would ask them for A-
bombs and they should not be able to refuse us. We and Sowiet should
win this war and whole the world should be Communistic. Then we should
assassinate Krustjev and other Sowiet leaders and we would be leader
of the NEW WORD. When this letter will reach you they have maked
away with me and all that knowed the planes. This letter is outsmuggled
from our Embassy in Stockholm where the Embassy is a chinese spy-shool.
My name is Ryo Liang Yüan. Officer in the department for State-secret.
If you do not belive this letter explain our hate to USA.
14-00000
...
-251100
11-12
E
MOCKHOLMA
11-12
E
71-11
EDMSSY OF THE
URITED STATES OF AMICA
?
MAIL ROOM
STOCKHOLM
American Embassy
Strandvagen 101
STOCKHOLM NO
35

