104-10126-10155
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
(
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL USE ONLY
CHSCA
Journal - Office of Legislative Counsel
Tuesday - 8 November 1977
Assassinations
Page 10
37. (Confidential - PG) LIAISON Received a telephone call
from Michael Glennon, Legal Counsel, Senate Foreign Relations
Subcommittee on International Operations, who was following up on a
request he made on 4 November for a copy of the secrecy oath which
former DCI Richard Helms had signed. I told Mr. Glennon that I was
checking this out with the appropriate elements of CIA and hoped to
have an answer for him by the following day.
::
:-
38. (Internal Use Only - PG) LIAISON Spent the better part
of the afternoon in the Coordination & Review staff conference room with
Michael J. Hershman, Deputy Staff Director, Subcommittee on
International Organizations, House International Relations Committee.
Also present were DDO representatives Evalina Vidal, Robert Brewster
(for only the beginning of the meeting) and June Elliott We discussed
the Subcommittee's request to make certain CIA information public
and Mr. Hershman gave us a summary he had prepared for the use of
Members at upcoming public hearings. Mrs. Elliott will review the
summary and sanitize it as necessary. The remainder of the session
was spent in an exchange of views as to CIA's role in ongoing
Congressional investigations of ROK/KCIA and related subjects.
39. (Internal Use Only - RJK) LIAISON Spoke with Lot Cooke,
on the staff of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, concerning
William R. Harris, a consultant with the Committee who also works
for the Rand Corporation. Since Harris has already been briefed at
Rand on compartmented clearances, it will not be necessary for him to
receive a briefing on them at this time. Jack Williamson, SO/DCI,
has been advised.
Cooke also requested the clearances held by Professor G. Robert
Blakey, Chief Counsel and Director, House Select Committee on
Assassinations, and Gary Cornwell, of the staff, because they wish to
review a sensitive Committee document. After checking with Dan Godar,
OS, I advised him that they had their proper clearances for reviewing
the documents.
40. (Unclassified - RSG) LIAISON Spoke with Betsey Wolf,
House Select Committee on Assassinations staff, and offered to send to
her a copy of the document she reviewed here yesterday. The document
was an index of Freedom of Information Act exemptions on documents
involving the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
CONFIDENTIAL
'INTERNAL USE ONLY
20017