120460303
104-10331-10115
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
-SECRET
23 August 1996
Note For:
Fred Wickham, DO
Eleanor Neiman, DO
Mike Luce, DO/Mexico
Valerie Patterson, DO/BA
Christine Hegeman, DO/BA
Linda Cipriani, OGC
From:
J. Barry Harrelson, CSI/HRG
Subject:
Meeting with ARRB Staff
1. Thursday afternoon I met with Dave Marwell,
Executive Director for the ARRB, and two of his staff,
Jeremy Gunn and Mary McAuliffe. I briefed them on the four
releases in the Lopez Report and Scelso Testimony that had
been identified as potential appeal items, and on the
Agency's concerns re the Australian documents. I requested
that the Board reconsider the release of the statements on
Mexico City political action programs, Scelso's comment on
Agee, the reference to the Mexican Police as a source and
Warrenton as site of the Agency's Record Center.
2. Marwell agreed to send a "staff recommendation" to
the Board recommending that they delay the release of these
four items to hear additional evidence from the Agency. The
rest of the Lopez Report and Scelso Testimony would be
released on schedule. If the Board accepts the staff's
recommendation, the four items will be addressed at the next
Washington meeting (27 September). If the Board rejects the
staff's recommendation, then we have the option of appealing
to the President. Marwell and Gunn seemed confident that
the Board would agree to delay the release.
3. Gunn requested that the Agency's additional
evidence on these four items (if provided in writing) be to
the Board members at the 27 September meeting. As I
understand it, DO/Mexico (Mike L.) will be preparing
evidence memos on "political action programs" and "Mexican
police" issues and OGC (Linda C.) will take the lead on
Agee. I will contact the DA/IRO (Don Hatch) on the Warrenton
issue.
4. Concerning the Australian documents, Marwell agreed
to delay Board action until the 16 October meeting. The
Agency's proposal on these documents should be sent to the
ARRB staff as soon as possible.
CL By: 611637 CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1 DRV FM: MULTIPLE
SECRET

