104-10439-10001
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
FILE
XAAZ-36310
23 December 1966
MEMORANDUM TO: DC/SB/SOV
FROM
SUBJECT
Frank Dwyer)
0
Suggested Graphological Assessment of OSWALD
Handwriting
1013-406
for FOIA Review on
SEP 1976
Document Number
1. I discussed this informally with Mr. Arthur Dooley, CI Staff,
who is knowledgeable on the OSWALD Case. Mr. Dooley mentioned that a
graphological assessment had not been done to his knowledge to determine
if personality restructuring had been attempted on OSWALD in the USSR.
Mr. Dooley questioned whether such an assessment would really make a
worthwhile or reliable contribution to the issue of OSWALD'S motivation,
and warrant the time and expense involved; that if such an assessment
was attempted in any formal sort of fashion, the "official" results
may only add confusion to the motivation issue, since such results
would not have truly scientific validity. He noted that the samples,
to his recollection, represented varicus environmental conditions ranging
from nonmal passport applications, to condensed diary notations and notes;
that a child's handwriting changes from grade school to college as the
speed of notetaking increases and the pressure mounts. In this case you
are dealing with a disturbed mentality as well.
2. Based on his familarity with the case Mr. Dooley feels that
OSWALD'S motivation is largely explained in terms of his neurotic background
his failure to achieve status, and his very deep resentment to all authority
After his stay in the Soviet Union, OSWALD's writings indicate that he felt
neither society had much to offer; and in effect, he rejected both.
:
3. Mr. Dooley noted that undoubtedly other factors came into play to
formulate OSWALD's idea to assassinate the President. For example, OSWALD
saw a movie on TV about an attempted presidential assassination with a rifl
shortly before his deed, which could have sparked him into action. As the
Warren Commission has indicated, the real motive may never be known.
4. Mr. Dooley said that the files are available for inspection by an
SB officer at any time to look for handwriting samples or any other purpose,
view of the above, he did not feel that anything could be proved for
certain and therefore questioned the merit of the suggestion at this time.
PREPARE FOR FILMING
CODE NO. (2, 3)
RYUAT REST. CODE
HP/M3
CABLE JOEN (11)
79 (3)
IP/CRU
FOR FILING
RECORD COPY
acestre coba of Tep
Frank Dayer
SB/CI/P
DEV 239248

