1000000
104-10337-10011
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
Office of
Congressional
Altairs
CA
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
1 June 1993
John:
This is the package of JFK material
from the Ford Library we talked about.
today. We received this package from
Steve Katz, Counsel to the Senate
Governmental Affairs Committee.
If you have any questions about
this, please call me at 37914 (secure).
Day/
13-00000
Date
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION
TYNOLLYN 1965
:
Reply to:
Subject :
To
Gerald R. Ford Library
July 29, 1992
1000 Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2114
MOTION TO
ANDIOR
CIA INFORMATION
Karen Holzhausen, Ford Library KON IN THIS DOCUMENT
Rockefeller Commission files information
: Steve Katz, Senate Committee on Government Affairs
Enclosed are the finding aid to the Rockefeller Commission files
we have processed, copies of all the withdrawal sheets, and some
explanatory information.
Our
About the withdrawal sheets: When we remove a classified
document from a folder we record more information for
administrative purposes than you find on these withdrawal sheets.
The data put into such fields as creator's agency, classifying
agency, classification level, comments, and special markings are
not printed on this short form that researchers see.
computer program was designed to produce these abbreviated public
descriptions because some agencies, chiefly the CIA, do not want
to be public identified as the originator of specific documents.
We have made the withdrawal sheets for the Rockefeller Commission
items we have processed more explicit than normal practice
because the Church Committee published the gist of most of these
documents in 1975, identifying the CIA connection. But, because
of the software limitations, the computer cannot print the
"agency" data on the short form.
I think there is enough information for you to deduce the
originating agency for most of these documents. Most of them
were supplied to the Rockefeller Commission by the CIA, although
many of them are of interagency origin. If you have questions
about particular sheets, please don't hesitate to call me.
We may find that some, perhaps many, of these documents have
already been declassified, but rather than take the time to
research all of them and delay "opening" the collection, we
simply "pink sheeted" everything and will wait to see what
happens with the proposed review commission. If they are not
systematically declassified, we will research them individually
as they are requested under mandatory review.
A Presidential Library Administered by the National Archives and Records Administration
13-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
Presidential Libraries
Review of JFK Records
Contacts
Ford:
Karen Holzhausen
Lessa Tobin
(313-741-2218)
Johnson: Tina Houston
(512-482-5137).
Kennedy:
Susanne Forbes
(617-729-4582)
LOG
2 Sept 1994 Meeting with Steve Tilley, NARA
Recommended that we begin with the Ford Library. The
Rockefeller Commission holdings are there and they contain
most, if not all, assassination related records that are at
the Johnson and Kennedy Libraries.
12 Sept 1994 phone conversation with Lessa Tobin (Ford)
They have screened the Rockefeller Commission material
and identified JFK assassination records. They have 1400
items in their data base and 6-7 feet of material to be
reviewed. They estimate that 80% of the records contain CIA
equities.
They would welcome reviewers this Fall (the sooner the
better since Ms. Tobin is going on maternity leave in
January).
t
13 Sept 1994 Meeting with C/HRG.
Briefed him on my phone call. The Ford Library is not
a one man job. 6-7 feet of material translates into 13-
15,000 pages. It could take 2-3 people a week or more to
complete an initial review and would probably have to send
material back to HRG for review and coordination. Told him
I plan request a list of the 1400 items in the data base and
needed to discuss specific procedures (handling documents
copying, redaction, etc.) with Karen Holzhausen. She is on
leave this week. He suggested mid October as a possible
date for trip.
14 Sept 1994 phone call with Lessa Tobin
She confirmed size of file approximately 13-15,000
pages (does not have a specific page count using same
rule as HRG, 2200 pages per foot). The 1400 items are the
number of Iden Aids prepared for NARA. She will send me a
complete set.
13-00000
Presidential Libraries (Ford)
JFK Assassination Records (pulled from Rockefeller
Commission Holdings)
1400 items 6-7 ft of material
The Rockefeller Commission investigated allegations
concerning the CIA involvement in the Assassination of
President Kennedy (p251-269 of the June 1975 Report...)
Allegations:
a
Hunt and Sturgis in Dullas (3 derelicts)
CIA relationship with Oswald through anti-Castro Cubans
(Hunt appears to be focus)
CIA relationship with Ruby via Sturgis
Hunt and Oswald in Mexico City
If most of the material deals with the above allegations,
the bulk of it will be released with minimal or no
redactions.
13-00000
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION
TYNOLLYN 1965
Gerald R. Ford Library
September 20, 1994
1000 Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2114
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
Mr. Barry Harrelson
Central Intelligence Agency
Center for the Study of Intelligence/HRG
402 Ames Building
Washington, D.C. 20505
Dear Mr. Harrelson:
I am sending out to you today by registered mail the document
identification forms for all of the Kennedy assassination materials
identified in the Ford Library whose status was recorded as "postponed".
This includes forms for about 1,000 items. This package does not
include identification forms for the 400 items whose status is "opened".
Also enclosed is a list explaining the shorthand collection titles we used'
on the identification forms.
Karen Holzhausen and I produced forms for all of the materials we
identified, including all duplicates. In some cases there were two, three
or four copies of the same document located in different files. We've
developed a system to keep track of those duplicates which we can
explain to your people when they arrive.
Karen and I are very much looking forward to your visit this fall but we
have lots of questions about how the process will work. Will you know
which items have already been declassified elsewhere? Will you be able
to recognize and act on non-CIA originated documents which have been
acted on at other repositories? Will you have to see the originals of each
item which are scattered throughout our vault collections, or can you just
examine the copy set we created during the identification process? Is
there anything we could be doing to help prepare for your visit? Will
there be follow-up work for us to do after you leave?
A Presidential Library Administered by the National Archives and Records Administration
13-00000
Finally, to help you with your planning, I enclose our transportation and
accommodations handout and, for your information, a copy of the
finding aid to the Rockefeller Commission Files and a guide to the
Library's complete holdings. We look forward to hearing from you after
you assess what kind of a job we have waiting for you here!
Sincerely,
lusa Tor
Leesa Tobin
Archivist
313/741-2218
Enclosures
13-00000
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION
TYNOLLYN 1965
Gerald R. Ford Library
1000 Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2114
U.S. PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES
WITHIN THE UNITED STATES:
Files, [1947-1974] 1975
SUMMARY DESCRIPTION
The U.S. President's Commission on CIA Activities Within the United States (also
known as the Rockefeller Commission) was charged with investigating allegations
of improper CIA activities within U.S. borders. The files consist of documents
created by the Commission in the course of its work (correspondence, testimony,
report drafts, etc.), as well as historical documents and exhibit items collected
during its investigation.
The portions of the file which are available for research (2.5 cubic feet) deal with
the investigation of possible CIA involvement in the assassination of President John
F. Kennedy or in anti-Castro plots of the early 1960s.
QUANTITY
41 cubic feet (ca. 82,000 pp.)
DONOR
Gerald R. Ford (Accession numbers 81-23 and 78-56)
ACCESS
Materials related to the assassination of President John F. Kennedy or to anti-
Castro activities, 1960-64, have been processed for research. A significant
portion of this material is security classified and accessible only through
researcher-initiated declassification review. The bulk of the Commission files are
unprocessed.
A Presidential Library Administered by the National Archives and Records Administration
13-00000
COPYRIGHT
Works prepared by U.S. Government employees as part of their official duties
are in the public domain. In addition, Mr. Ford has donated to the United
States of America his copyright interest in any other of his writings that might
be included in this collection. The copyright interest to materials written by
other individuals or organizations is presumed to remain with them.
Prepared by:
Karen Holzhausen
May 31, 1992
13-00000
U.S. PRESIDENT'S COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES
WITHIN THE UNITED STATES: FILES RELATED TO THE
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY
INTRODUCTION
President Gerald R. Ford created the Commission on CIA Activities within the
United States on January 4, 1975. He directed the Commission to determine
whether or not any domestic CIA activities exceeded the Agency's statutory
authority and to make appropriate recommendations. He appointed Vice President
Nelson A. Rockefeller chairman of the Commission. (The Commission is often
referred to as the "Rockefeller Commission.") Other members were John T.
Connor, C. Douglas Dillon, Erwin N. Griswold, Lane Kirkland, Lyman L.
Lemnitzer, Ronald Reagan, and Edgar F. Shannon, Jr. David W. Belin, a former
staff member of the Warren Commission, was named Executive Director. Named
Senior Counsel were Harold A. Baker, Ernest Gellhorn, Robert B. Olsen, and
William W. Schwarzer. Counsel were Marvin L. Gray, Jr.; George A. Manfredi;
James N. Roethe; and James B. Weidner. Ronald J. Greene served as Special
Counsel. Staff members were R. Mason Cargill, Peter R. Clapper, and Timothy S.
Hardy.
The Commission looked into all aspects of CIA operations within the United
States. Its report, submitted to the President in June 1975, lists the following
significant areas of investigation: mail intercepts; Intelligence Community
coordination; "Operation CHAOS" (collecting information on dissidents); protection
of the Agency against threats of violence; other investigations by the Office of
Security; involvement of the CIA in improper activities for the White House
(including Watergate); domestic activities of the Directorate of Operations;
domestic activities of the Directorate of Science and Technology; CIA relationships
with other federal, state, and local agencies; indices and files on American citizens;
and allegations concerning the assassination of President Kennedy. The
Commission also looked into the legal authority of the CIA and its internal and
external controls.
One area on which the Commission collected evidence, but did not include in
its report, was the role of the CIA in assassination plots against foreign leaders.
The study focused on plots against Fidel Castro of Cuba, Rafael Trujillo of the
Dominican Republic, and Patrice Lumumba of the Congo. The Commission was
primarily interested in seeing if these plots involved any domestic illegal activities,
such as connections with organized crime, as had been alleged. The report states
-3-
13-00000
that the Commission did not have time to complete the study, so it was turning the
materials over to the White House.
The processed segment of this collection consists of materials identified as
being related to either the John Kennedy assassination or to plots against Castro.
The anti-Castro materials are included because of allegations that Castro or his
supporters were part of a conspiracy to kill President Kennedy as retribution.
THE INVESTIGATION OF THE KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
The Commission investigated allegations that the CIA was somehow involved in
the assassination of President Kennedy. Specifically, it looked into allegations that
E. Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis were CIA agents and were present in Dallas
("the derelicts") at the time of the assassination and could have fired the alleged
shots from the grassy knoll. It also investigated claims that the CIA had
relationships with Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby.
The Commission heard testimony, taped interviews, took depositions, consulted
experts in forensic pathology and ballistics, examined photographic evidence, and
requested documents from various intelligence and law enforcement agencies. The
Commission concluded that the findings of the Warren Commission regarding a
lone assassin were correct and that Hunt and Sturgis were not the derelicts. No
concrete evidence was presented to link Oswald or Ruby to the CIA; the
Commission concluded that the allegations were "farfetched speculation."
DESCRIPTION OF PROCESSED FILES
These files contain two distinct types of material. I will refer to the first type
as Kennedy assassination materials and the second type as anti-Castro materials,
although both types were selected because of their possible connection to the
Kennedy assassination.
KENNEDY ASSASSINATION MATERIALS: Most relate to the allegation
that CIA operatives (possibly in the persons of E. Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis)
fired shots from the "grassy knoll" in Dealey Plaza at the time of the Kennedy
shooting. Also considered was the allegation that Oswald and/or Jack Ruby had
connections with the CIA. Witnesses, many of whom were unsolicited, provided
testimony and exhibits supporting or refuting those allegations. The findings of the
Warren Commission regarding Oswald as a lone assassin and the single-bullet
theory were considered through analysis of photographs and the Zapruder film,
examination of Kennedy autopsy materials by a panel of medical consultants, sworn
testimony, and examination of documents from the CIA and other agencies. A
copy of the Zapruder film, lent by Robert Groden, is in the collection.
-4-
13-00000
There are also drafts of Chapter 19 of the Commission report, which deals with
this aspect of the investigation.
ANTI-CASTRO MATERIALS: They consist primarily of copies of
"historical" documents provided to the Commission by the CIA, predominantly, and
the State Department, Defense Intelligence Agency, and Justice Department. The
documents deal mainly with planning for covert operations in Cuba, 1960-64,
including assassination attempts on Fidel Castro, but also include some interspersed
materials on the Trujillo and Lumumba assassinations. The Cuba documents
include some items on the Bay of Pigs invasion and the Cuban missile crisis, but by
far the bulk of the material relates to Operation MONGOOSE. Included are
minutes of meetings of the various special groups assigned to planning anti-Castro
operations, reports on the operations, and memoranda between the individuals
involved.
Also included in the "Assassination Materials" processed are transcripts of
sworn testimony and interviews conducted by Rockefeller Commission staff with
former CIA, State Department, and Defense Department officials from the 1960s
regarding what they knew about plans to assassinate foreign leaders and about the
connection between the Cuba operations and organized crime.
SELECTED RELATED MATERIALS (JUNE 1992):
The Congressional Files of Gerald R. Ford contain materials related to his
service on the Warren Commission (17 cubic feet). The Records of the U.S.
Department of the Army, Military District of Washington, Directorate of
Ceremonies and Special Events contain approximately two cubic feet of records on
the transport of President Kennedy's remains, his funeral ceremony and interment,
and administration of the gravesite. These materials are open for research.
The Presidential Handwriting File and the files of Presidential counsel Philip
Buchen contain materials on the intelligence investigations of the mid-1970s,
including the Rockefeller Commission. These collections are open for research.
The Ford Presidential Papers may contain additional materials related generally to
the Rockefeller Commission or congressional investigations of the intelligence
community. Use the PRESNET database to locate them.
The neighboring Bentley Historical Library holds papers of John Stiles relating
to his collaboration with Gerald Ford on Portrait of the Assassin, a book about Lee
Harvey Oswald which grew out of Ford's work on the Warren Commission.
-5-
13-00000
Additional materials on the Rockefeller Commission or plots against Fidel
Castro are in unprocessed collections or unprocessed series of open collections.
These include about 3,000 pages of collected historical documents, which continue
to be heavily classified, gathered by the White House on anti-Castro activities.
[NOTE: For additional information regarding the acquisition and processing of the
Kennedy and anti-Castro files from this collection, please see MEMO FOR THE
FILE, dated June 8, 1992, which is appended to this finding aid.]
3
-6-
13-00000
Container
1
2
3
Contents
Belin-Gray-Greene Files
B-G-G (II-AA), Memoranda to Legal Staff
B-G-G (IV-K), Background Material on Oswald and Warren
Commission
B-G-G (IV-T), Withholding of Evidence from the Warren
Commission
Baker-Weidner Files
B-W (II-B), Mr. Hunt's File-Mr. Clapper
Olsen-Roethe Files
O-R (I-X), Gregory, Schoenman, Groden & Jaffe
O-R (I-AA), Hunt, E. Howard--Interviewed 3/4/75
O-R (I-00), Sturgis, Frank
O-R (I-XX), Chapman, E. Forrest
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (1)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (2)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (3)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (4)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (5)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (6)
O-R (III-A), Staff Interview Transcript-March 26, 1975, (7)
Olsen-Roethe Files
O-R (III-A), Extra Copies of All Gregory Related Exhibits,
(8)
O-R (III-A), Ralph Schoenman, Re Robert Kennedy
Assassination, (9)
O-R (III-B), Staff Interview Transcript--Marchetti, April
3, 1975
O-R (III-C), Frank Sturgis Testimony Transcript, April 3,
1975, (1)
O-R (III-C), Frank Sturgis Testimony Transcript, April 3,
1975, (2)
O-R (III-D), Frank Sturgis Testimony and Tapes, 4-4-75
O-R (III-E), John K. Lattimer Testimony Transcript, May 7,
1975, (1)
O-R (III-E), John K. Lattimer Exhibits, 1975
O-R (III-F), Staff Interview Transcript--Wecht, May 7,
1975, (1)
O-R (III-F), Staff Interview Transcript--Wecht, May 7,
1975, (2)
O-R (III-F), Cyril H. Wecht--Exhibits, (3)
Olsen-Roethe Files
O-R (III-G), Staff Interview Transcript--April 18, 1975
O-R (V-A), FBI Lab Reports--Hunt & Sturgis Photos
O-R (V-B), Kennedy Assassination--Miscellaneous Notes
O-R (V-C), Kennedy Assassination--Panel of Medical
Consultants, (1)
O-R (V-C), Kennedy Assassination--Panel of Medical
Consultants, (2)
O-R (V-D), FBI Material re Kennedy Assassination
7-
13-00000
Container
4
5
Contents
O-R (V-E), NPIC Analysis of Zapruder Filming of John F.
Kennedy Assassination
O-R (V-F), Kennedy Assassination--Paul Hoch Letter re
Warren Commission, (Also see "Requests for Info--CIA),
(1)
O-R (V-F), Kennedy Assassination--Paul Hoch Letter re
Warren Commission, (Also see "Requests for Info--CIA),
(2)
O-R (V-F), Kennedy Assassination--Paul Hoch Letter re
Warren Commission, (Also see "Requests for Info--CIA),
(3)
O-R (V-G), Kennedy Assassination--Medical and Scientific
Articles, (1)
O-R (V-G), Kennedy Assassination--Medical and Scientific
Articles, (2)
O-R (V-G), Kennedy Assassination--Medical and Scientific
Articles, (3)
Olsen-Roethe Files
O-R (V-H), Kennedy Assassination--General Correspondence
O-R (V-I), Requests for Information--FBI, Justice
O-R (V-J), Selected Documents Relating to Allegations
Concerning the Assassination of President Kennedy, (1)
O-R (V-J), Selected Documents Relating to Allegations
Concerning the Assassination of President Kennedy, (2)
O-R (V-K), Lattimer, John
O-R (V-L), Wecht, Cyril H.
O-R (VI-C), Requests for Information--CIA
Zapruder Film loaned to Commission by Robert Groden on
3/27/75
Assassination Files
Assassination Materials, "Misc. Materials (3)"
Assassination Materials--"Interviews (3)"
Assassination Materials, "CIA Correspondence (3)".
Assassination Files
Assassination Materials, "Correspondence (2)"
Assassination Materials, Deposition of a CIA Employee
Assassination Materials, Deposition of Edw. G. Lansdale
Assassination Materials, Deposition of Edw. G. Lansdale
(portion)
Assassination Materials, Review of Dulles Crono (sic) re
Kennedy Assassination
Assassination Materials, "Sturgis (2)"
Assassination Materials, "What Could Castro Have Known?"
Assassination Materials, CIA Connections with Organized
Crime
Assassination Materials, CIA Relationship with Robert A.
Maheu
Assassination Materials, "Affidavits (2)"
Assassination Materials, "Chron--Assassinations (2)"
Assassination Materials, Request of 8 Apr 75--Mongoose
Assassination Materials, L. Fletcher Pourty
8
13-00000
Container
6
Contents
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (1)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (2)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (3)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (4)
Assassination Files
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (5)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (6)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (7)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (8)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (9)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (10)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (11)
Assassination Materials, Miscellaneous Rockefeller
Commission and CIA Files, (12)
Assassination Materials, Project (Name Classified)
Chapter Drafts
Chapter 19 Drafts, (1)
Chapter 19 Drafts, (2)
- 9 -
13-00000
Date
: June 10, 1992
Reply to:
Karen Holzhausen
Subject :
1000 Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2114
Kennedy Assassination materials in Rockefeller
Commission
To
:
THE FILE
ACQUISITION OF COMMISSION FILES
The Ford Library holds two sets of files of the President's
Commission on CIA Activities within the United States
(Rockefeller Commission). The first received, a copy set which
was kept at the White House when the originals were transferred
to the Justice Department in June of 1975, was received via the
National Archives on March 1, 1978. The originals came later, in
November of 1980. The copy set is somewhat smaller than the
original set because some administrative materials were not
copied. It is the Kennedy-related materials in the original set
which have been processed in part and made available for
research.
The Ford Library received these materials under the terms of
President Ford's deed of gift.
PROCESSING THE FILES RELATED TO THE KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
In early 1992, President Ford stated publicly that he
favored the opening of currently closed files on the Kennedy
assassination and investigations thereof. The Ford Library
notified him that the Rockefeller Commission files contained
material related to the assassination and that staff planned to
consolidate those materials and process them for opening.
endorsed this action.
He
The task of selecting Kennedy materials was not an easy one,
and Library staff do not claim to have found every document.
Archivists had a rough finding aid that came with the collection,
consisting of folder titles and, in some cases, lists of
documents within folders. The materials were organized by
Commission staff team not by subject.
Because Robert Olsen and
James Roethe had primary responsibility for investigating
possible CIA connections with the assassination, archivists
started with their files. Within the Olsen-Roethe files there
was an identified Kennedy assassination series, which archivists
pulled first and examined. Based on their reading of those
files, and other background research, archivists were able to
examine the folder title list for the complete collection and
identify relevant folders in other staff files.
A Presidential Library Administered by the National Archives and Records Administration
13-00000
There was also about a cubic foot of material called
"Assassination Materials" which was not connected with a specific
Commission staff team. In it were documents regarding plans for
or discussions of actions against Castro, Trujillo, and Lumumba.
Those folders which appeared to have anything to do with Castro
were pulled for processing because of the issue of a possible
link between U.S. attempts to assassinate Castro and the Kennedy
assassination.
No attempt was made to go through the whole collection to
search for stray materials. Nor could archivists identify all
the people whose names appeared on folders--they may have missed
some simply because they did not know of a connection. Folders
identified only by date of testimony were also not examined.
Ford Library archivists believe that processing of the full
collection may eventually lead to the discovery of additional
Kennedy material.
DESCRIPTION OF PROCESSED MATERIALS (2.5 cubic feet)
So,
on Oct 1992
Archivists pulled and processed slightly over two cubic feet
of material. (This is from the original files only.) Of the
4759 pages, plus audiovisual material, approximately 68% (3232
pages) dealt with the investigation of a possible direct CIA
connection with the Kennedy assassination. This material was
pulled from staff files and chapter drafts.
The other 32% (1527 pages) consisted of materials related to
the investigation of CIA involvement in anti-Castro activities
during the early 1960s. This was pulled from a series called
"Assassination Materials," which was different from the body of
the Commission files in that the folder titles were not coded and
numbered and there seemed to be less organization within the
files.
REMOVAL OF CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS
Of
From the processed materials, archivists removed
approximately 450 documents for national security reasons.
the 450 documents, 29% were classified Top Secret, 48% were:
Secret, 3% were Confidential, and 19% were unmarked. A few
CODEWORD documents were found. Just over 60% of the withdrawn
items were dated between 1960 and 1964. Thirty-two percent were
from 1975, created during the tenure of the Commission.
There were classified documents from several agencies but
An
about 64% were created by CIA or had "CIA interest."
additional 25% would be considered White House documents for
declassification purposes (including NSC/interagency documents
from the 1960s as well as the classified materials originated by
the Rockefeller Commission itself). State, Defense Department,
Army, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Federal Bureau of Investigation
account for the rest. There were only four FBI documents.
13-00000
KENNEDY ASSASSINATION MATERIALS: Most is unclassified and
is open for research. The 16% that is classified is mainly
testimony which includes information on CIA operations.
ANTI-CASTRO MATERIALS: Approximately 87% is classified, and
much of the unclassified material is simply requests for
documents, transmittal memos, and cover sheets. Therefore much
of this section is unavailable for research until it can be
reviewed by the CIA or other originating agency.
13-00000
ARCHIVES AND RECORDS
ADMINISTRATION
TYNOLLYN 1965
Gerald R. Ford Library
1000 Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2114
GUIDE TO HISTORICAL MATERIALS
in the
GERALD R. FORD LIBRARY
September 1994
By David A. Horrocks
Supervisory Archivist
124
Telephone 313/741-2218
Fax 313/741-2341
734
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
A Presidential Library Administered by the National Archives and Records Administration
13-00000
Memo for the Record
Subject:
Reviewers: HRG
71 7 1994
CIA SPECIAL Dec
RELEASER FULL
2000
Review of JFK files at Ford Presidential
Library, November 14-17, 1994
Barry Harrelson, Kathy Puchnick
DO Lee Carl)
Ford Library Staff: Karen Holzhausen
Leesa Tobin
1). HRG reviewers arrived in Ann Arbor late Monday morning
and begin reviewing material that afternoon. After the
first day the hours were set for 7:30 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.
2) The Ford Library Staff had done an outstanding job
preparing the documents for our review. Copies had been
made and were in chrono order. Each document was index and
had an identification aid attached. Karen and Leesa made
themselves available for questions; if we needed to see the
original file or document they provided it immediately.
3) We reviewed each document containing CIA equities
including those already released. They had been working
with Steve Tilly, NARA, to identify documents in the Ford
Library holdings which had been made available to the public
through NARA.
4)
Procedures:
Documents which could be released in full were stamped with
"Approved For Release...” or “CIA Has No Objections...".
Documents containing information requiring protection were
stamped/marked "...Release as Redacted or Sanitized".
Classified/sensitive information was highlighted in yellow.
Documents containing particular sensitive information or
that raised question among the reviewers were tagged for
review at HQ. Testimonies of Agency Officials to the
Rockefeller Commission were also tagged for HQ review.
Their were a number of sensitive White House/NSC documents
and documents from other agency which mentioned CIA but
contained no classified CIA equities.
In these cases the
stamp was modified to reflect that it applied only to the
CIA information and that the document must be reviewed by
the appropriate agency before they could be released
13-00000
5) Team reviewed approximately 1200 documents (10,400
pages). Thirty-two documents (1165 pages) were tagged for
review at HQ.
6) The trip was highly successful and we have established
a good rapport with the Library Staff. At this point I
don't see the need to send another team. The remaining
documents and any new issues can be handled by phone (STU
III), FAX or courier.
The only reason to send someone up
would be for a final look at the material after redaction.
I have confidence in the Library Staff, but we should
discuss with the DO.
BH
13-00000
secret
21 March 1995
Tony Frasketi }
DS&T IRO
Attached are six pages of a 26 June 1975 Senate Select
Committee request for CIA information. This document came
from the Ford Library and is part of the JFK Assassination
project. ect. Two of the pages have no DS&T equities but are
sent to you for background information.
On page 3 we are protecting everything except for items
40, and 44. We need your reading on these. Since CIA has
admitted to drug testing, we may not be able to defend this
with the JFK Board.
12.
On page 4 please note items 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and
On page 5 please note items 14, 18, 26 and 29.
On page 6 please note item 13. Kater, Jackson, Ward
and O'Dell are being protected, but not the other three.
Please call me on green 30106, I think these matters
can be resolved quickly.
Thank you.
Kathy Puchnick
O/DCI/CSI/HRG
13-00000
FRANK CHURCH, IDANG, CHAIRM
JOHN G. TOWER, TEXAS, VICE CHA
PHILIP A. HART, MICH.
WALTER F. MONDALE, MINN.
WALTER D. HUDOLESTON, KY.
ROBERT MORGAN, N.C.
GARY HART, COLO.
HOWARD H. BAKER, JR., TENN.
BARRY GOLDWATER, ARIZ,
CHARLES MC C. MATHIAS, JR., MD.
RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, PA,
WILLIAM G. MILLER, STAFF DIRECTOR
FREDERICK A. O. SCHWARZ, JR., CHIEF COUNSEL
CURTIS R. SMOTHERS, MINORITY COUNSEL
SECRE
United States Senator
SELECT COMMITTEE TO
STUDY GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS WITH
RESPECT TO INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES
(PURSUANT TO S. RES. 21, NTH CONGRESS)
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20510
Mr. William E. Colby
Director of Central Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D. C.
Dear Mr. Colby:
June 26, 1975
Poge
22
equities
for background
mfo
On May 27 and June 2, the Senate Select Committee informed
the Central Intelligence Agency of the Committee's plans
for examining the field of foreign intelligence