14-00000
104-10105-10278
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Henry L. BRETTON
Office of Security records contain a file on a Henry L.
Bretton who was born on May 18, 1916 in Berlin, Germany.
As
of 1963, this person was Professor of Political Science at
the University of Michigan.
He also has been known as Henry Hans
Heinz Bismark and Henry Burk. The information in the following
paragraphs pertains to this Henry L. Bretton who is probably
identical to the writer of the letter dated 3 January 1975 to
the Director.
In July 1945 Bretton, who was an Army enlisted man attached
to MIS (Fwd) FID, was under consideration for transfer to OSS.
An investigation at that time raised questions as to Bretton's
political sympathies. Consequently, Bretton was security dis-
approved in August 1945 for transfer to OSS.
Bretton was informed in 1945 that he would not be hired by
OSS because "Washington Security would not approve his employment."
Bretton reportedly was "distressed" by this decision.
In December
1945, when Bretton returned to the U.S., he personally called at
the Security Office and stated he was aware he had been disapproved
and requested the reason thereof. He was told there were no
openings.
In addition, according to a memorandum in Bretton's file
dated 19 November 1945 from the Strategic Services Unit, Mission
to Germany, European Theater, earlier that fall that Unit had
tentatively recruited MIS T/4 Henry L. Bretton and that the
Security Branch in Washington failed to pass him. According to
this memorandum, when Bretton was told the Unit could not employ
him, Bretton was very much upset.
The memorandum indicated
that Bretton had earned the high regard of the officers immediately
concerned for some tentative work Bretton had done for the Unit.
In April 1949 Bretton was still evidencing concern for being
dismissed from SSU.
Bretton was given a statement that the
Adjutant General had no information that the circumstances of
his honorable discharge from the service might in any way be
considered derogatory.
In July 1956, Bretton was of interest to the Domestic
Collection Division as a potential source of foreign intelligence
information. In connection with this interest, National Agency
Name Check was conducted on Bretton at Army Intelligence. The
OS 5 0021/A
RETURN TO GIA
Backgrunds
Do Not Reproduce
records of Army Intelligence contained a memorandum dated
16 November 1955 which indicated that 1st Lt. Henry L. Bretton
had made complaints to the CIC, to the IG and to AGO, through
his Congressman, with regard to a personnel security investiga- .
tion conducted on him. Bretton alleged that the Government
investigators had given information to his political opponents
concerning his (Bretton's) Party politics and information
concerning his marital status.
Subsequent inquiry by the Army
failed to indicate misconduct on the part of its investigators.
(Another name check on Bretton in August 1963
of the files of the Counter Intelligence Records
Facility, Army Intelligence Center, disclosed that
Bretton was investigated in August and September 1955
by the CIC upon receipt of derogatory security informa-
tion about Bretton's ex-wife who was alleged to dominate
him. The results of this investigation reportedly were
favorable to Bretton. The CIC records also stated that
Bretton at the time was being investigated in connection
with his application for a Reserve Commission.)
Based on past (1945) unresolved questions regarding Bretton's
political orientation, Bretton was security disapproved in
September 1961 as a Personnel Placement Division Lead Source.
The Domestic Collection Division had an interest in Bretton
in May 1963 in connection with a trip Bretton was taking to
Nigeria and other parts of Africa. An AD HOC Secret or Confidential
clearance was denied Bretton.
In April 1964 the Africa Division advised that Bretton was
going to Ghana as an instructor and the Station had inquired
regarding Bretton's use. A representative of the Africa Division
stated that the Domestic Collection Division had informed him
that Bretton had expressed a dislike of the Central Intelligence
Agency to them and because of recent events in Ghana (i.e.,
expulsion of U.S. instructors) the Africa Division was going to
alert the Station to stay completely away from Bretton.
2
2