14-00000
104-10219-10285
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
1
HX-11
21 February 1961
MEMORANDUMFOR: The Department of State
ATTENTION: Director, Office of Security
SUBJECT: Mr. Emery J. Adam
MARTIN, William
MITCHELL, Burton
1. Reference is made to your letter of 11 October 1961 captioned
"MARTIN, William and MITCHELL, Burton", and to your recent letter
of 16 January 1961, captioned as above, your file reference SYIMMU.
2. Thank you for your letter of 16 October 1960, which enclosed
a copy of the news article regarding Subjects, which appeared in the
New York Daily News Sunday Edition of 11 September 1960. We regret
that through an oversight your letter was not immediately acknowledged
and an indication provided to you of the status of the action undertaken
in response to your queries. In the interim, however, the necessary
action and file checks have been completed and the results are reported
below.
3. With reference to the news article itself, and your request for
verification of the information reported in the press, a check of our
records failed to develop any information pertaining to the allegation
that Subjects joined the Communist Party in February 1938, and that
their party names were "Martin WILLIAMS" & "Mitch BERNON",
respectively. It is suggested that you may wish to refer this question
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, as we note that neither of the
above references indicates that a copy was forwarded to the Bureau,
nor that a separate inquiry was being made of that office.
4. With reference to our request for information concerning the
identity of the refugee organization which allegedly obtained a bulletin
containing this information, appropriate inquiries have been made by
our representatives in London. The latter advised in late December 1960
SECRET
that this news item was discussed with representatives of MI-5, who
advised that they were unable to develop any information either to refute
or to support the story as carried in the press. However, MI-5 indicated
that they consider it probable that the actual source was a certain Joseph
HEISLER, born 7 July 1911, in Czechoslovakia, who is believed to have
been used at times as a contact by Mr. Henry B. MAULE, the chief
London correspondent of "The New York Times". HEISLER on occasion
has laid claim to having sources behind the Iron Curtain, but sticks to
the opinion that he probably obtained his information from a Czech
Refugee organization, not further identified by name. They also indi-
cated that the British consider it highly improbable that there is any
truth in this particular story.
5. Our records indicate that the above Joseph HEISLER, who
first arrived in the United Kingdom in 1939, and since then has engaged
in various export-import transactions, may already be known to your
Department. His first came to attention in September 1957 when our
representatives in London were requested to obtain liaison traces on
HEISLER for Mr. Clinton Grace, USIS representative in London, who
had received an unsolicited approach from a J. Bernard HUTTON,
identified by MI-5 as Joseph HEISLER. Our records indicate that a
report of Mr. Grace's contacts with HEISLER was forwarded to USIA
Headquarters in late 1957, and that certain documents relating to
HEISLER's import-export operations were forwarded by the Economic
Defense Office representatives in London to your Department at about
the same time. The files show that a full copy of the MI-5 report, sug-
gesting that J. Bernard HUTTON is identical with Joseph HEISLER,
accompanied the report to USIA Headquarters. A copy of these traces
is provided for your convenience, as attachment herewith.
6. We note that in a reply to MI-5, prepared by our representa-
tives in response to the above mentioned traces on HEISLER, mention
is made of a 1946 visa application filed by HEISLER, presumably for
entry into the United States, although the actual reference is not avail-
able. It is requested that any additional information which may be
reflected in the indices of the Department of State with reference to
Joseph HEISLER's visa application and on his contacts with Comintern
or Soviet Intelligence officials or organizations, be provided to this
Agency as expeditiously as possible.
7. The foregoing information is restricted for internal use of the
SECRET
addresses only, and may not be disseminated outside the addressee
office without the prior approval of the originator.
FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR (PLANS)
WILLIAM A. HARVEY
1 Attachment
As stated:
cc w/att: Federal Bureau of Investigation
cc w/att: National Security Agency
Attn: Mr. S. Wesley Reynolds
DD/P/FI/D/APotocki:mem
Distribution:
Orig & 1 w/att - Addressee
1 w/att - 100-6-124/3
1 w/att - 201-282337
1 w/att - 201-282338
2 w/att - OS/SRS
1 w/att - 201-207250 (Joseph HEISLER)
1 w/att - chrono
Based on: OELW 18040
OELA 32666
OELA 21634
SECRET
ATTACHMENT
I think there is no doubt from the particulars and description
given in paragraph 1 of that letter that the man in whom you are cur-
rently interested is Joseph Heisller, born 7 July 1911, a Czechoslo-
vakian national who first arrived in the U.K. on 20 June 1939.
"HEISLER was educated in Chrast until 1930, when he went to
Berlin and studied medicine. In 1933 he returned to Czechoslovakia
and became a journalist. According to his own statement made to the
British Police in September 1941, HEISLER became interested in Com-
munism in Berlin in 1930 and joined the Communist Party in 1932. He
wrote articles for a communist periodical called "Red West" and was
associated with the organization "Red Help". In 1933 he transferred to
the Czech Communist Party and wrote for "Rude Pravo". In April 1936
he went to Moscow and obtained employment on the staff of the "Moscow
Evening News".
"According to a usually reliable source HEISLER attended the
Lenin School in Moscow in about 1937. He admitted visiting the Lenin
School but maintained that he had never attended an intensive course of
political instruction. He also claimed that in 1935 he had been invited
to become a citizen of the U.S.S.R., but as he had refused, and that by
1938 he was no longer a member of the Communist Party.
"After his arrival in the U.K. HEISLER joined the Thomas Mann
group of Czech journalists. (This was one of the emigre groups formed
under the Czech Refugee Trust Fund). He was reliably reported to be a
Communist at that time. HEISLER was employed by the Czech Ministry
for Foreign Affairs from about August 1941 until February 1946 as a
radio commentator and translator. He is known to have said that he
received a salary from the Czech Embassy "for propaganda". After
the war he made several visits to Czechoslovakia; on the last occasion
he returned to this country on 21 February 1946. Although he claims
to have resigned from Czech Government employment at the time of the
Communist coup d'etat, reliable sources show that he was, at least until
October 1948, a contact of Dr. ZEMAN, who at that time was located
Secretary in the Czech Embassy and the representative there of the
Czech Ministry of the Interior. HEISLER was strongly suspected of
acting as an agent for ZEMAN. He was also reported to be posing as a
Socialist but in reality to be a Communist.
US OFFICIALS ONLY
"In December 1947 HEISLER applied to the Home Office for per-
mission to publish a weekly newspaper in the Czech language for the
Czech communities in this country, to establish a literary and music
agency through which foreign literature could be placed in this country
and from time to time to publish books, mainly for export. He was
granted permission to work as a free-lance journalist.
"At the end of 1947 HEISLER applied for a Certificate of Natural-
isation, but this was refused in March 1949.
"In March 1949 HEISLER started a firm named the Hidex Com-
pany, which claimed to be the sole agent for a firm of Spanish cotton
manufacturers. This firm does not appear to have had a good reputa-
tion. In 1951 he was connected with an import and export firm named
All-Ways Service, and in 1952 with Wetex Company and The Metes
Company Limited. Since that time he has continuously come to notice
in connection with arms dealing. There is, however, no evidence to
connect him with any political activity. Recent information suggests
that he may be in some financial difficulties.
"HEISLER married first on 10 October 1940 Elena nee KUHLBECKOVA,
who died on 9 September 1950. They had two British born children.
On 18 December 1950 he married a British subject named Pearl GOLD,
by whom he has one child. The HEISLERS lived at various addresses in
London until about 1954, since when they have lived in Sussex. Their
present address is 33 Gerald Road, Worthing."
US OFFICIALS ONLY
FID/SAS indices checked 10 Feb 61 - Negative results
Dr. Jakob Y. FISCHER
HAYANKO Hanako 9 Common-law Japanese wife
Rheinland German Kitchen.

