1104-10071-10125
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
ROUTING AND RECORD CHEET
Rate: Officer delegations should be used in the "TO" column. Under each comment a line should be drawn to correspond
with the comment number in the "TO" columns. Each officer should initial (check mark)
every item under routing. This Routing and Record Sheet should be returned to Registry.
R/ANALYSIS
TELEPHONE NO
DATE
(EPSA 34.97
COMMENTS
DATE
OFFICERS TELEPHONE
INITIALS
1200
FUDD
B
28
MAR
25 1608 Ex
20
CAD
NE/S/India
03
1210
ICE
29
Melatonics Jomiclan) 6
283
MA
30 MA
2
afy
てんつ
06
3-5,7,9: Subject is Crother
Thomas GEORGE al Fomistan 07
POGLAJEN KOLAROVIC)
1-8: Can we wou broek wameclick?
COPY-GN FOARD
of local
8-06: Namachack, clo
80
120955
ABSTRACTI
ELVO
BESLE
MAR 1955
8916
REPRODUCTION IS DEST OBTAINABLE
FROM APERTURE CARD SUBMITTED
14-00000
VIA:
AIR
22
Secret
DISF
Η ΝΟΙ
(EFSA-73497
DATE:
11 March 1955
13-1
منه.
Тог
Chief, FE
FROM:
Senior Representative, Philippines)
SUBJECT: GENERAL-- Intelligence
22
22 SPECIFIC-- Meeting with "Professor LAURA" (Subject of (SMANI 9539)
REF: (SMANI 9539, DIR-39952
1. Attached are two copies of a memorandum for the record on the Subject of a
contact between Robert F. CHATHAM and "Professor LAURA" to when reference was
made in both MANID 2539 and DIR-39952. This contact was made at the request
of the deputy chief to MIDWATCH. A saniticed copy of the memorandum has
been transmitted to the MILWATCH office. Any action in furtherance of the
discussions described in the memorandum would necessarily be taken by the
local ODACID establishment.
2. No plans are presently known for extending ONACID support to Subject; how
ovor, if any such support were to be given by private persons (such as
Secretary ARANETA) this probably would not become known to ODYOKE circles.
3. It appeared from his remarks that Subject had not contacted KUBARK channels
in the course of his current Asian tour - either in India or Indochina.
Discreet questioning revealed that the 2 March meeting under ARANETAS
sponsorship was evidently Subject's first direct appeal, in the course of
his current tour, to ODYOKE for assistance. However, Subject may have been
withholding details of other contacts with ODYOKE representatives. This
would appear a valid assumption in view of the fact that he denied (in
response to a question) that he had contacted ODIOME representatives recent-
ly in Hong Kong (per paragraph five of (SMAND-9539).
22
4. With reference to the potential for KUBARK purposes of Subject's organisation,
it became manifestly apparent in the course of his remarks that no cohesive
vehicle exists for the purposes he described (however laudatory his purposes,
particularly in the Hanoi-Haiphong areas); that Subject has given only
limited attention to the types of materials to be disseminated by his
"friends", and that Subject appeared to bo far too unsystematic to be
entrusted with anything but the finished product in quantity (rather than
funds to arrange for its publication).
Attachment:
Clarence & Kossom
Clarence T. Douthat
Twe-coptes of memorandum as indicated above
Rive.
Chatham
Secret
576-8-2-27
:
APERTURE CARD REPRODUSTIONS
8916
14-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE FECORD:
Secret
480°
(1031) 3497
22
3 March 1955
SUBJECT: Heeting with Professor Professor LAURA LAURA"
:
On the evening of 2 March 1955, CHATHAM proceeded to the apartment of Agriculture
Secretary Salvador ARANETA with a member of the ODACID political section and an
ODCHOP staff member. In brief conversation with the ODCHOP officer prior to
reaching the ARANETA hane, CHATHAM explained that he had been instructed not to
specifically identify himself as anything but OLACID (that is, not to claim
USIA connections); and that something was known of the "Professor's"
activities elsewhere, which though apparently well intentioned, were subject to
come question from the OLYOKE policy viewpoint. The ODCHOP officer explained
that his only interest was in complying with the wishes of ARANETA (with whom
ho had close liaison relationship which he di not wish to jeopardise in any way)
that he bring some representative of OlACID by to meet his guest.
We were ushered into the ARANETA penthouse at 6:15 p.m. and were immediately
greeted by ARANETA himself and his wife who evidently had been convereing on
the balcony with the man they introduced as "professor LAURA" -- somewhat care-
fully emphasising the title and the name, the latter was pronounced "LOU (as
in loud) RA" giving equal stress to bota syllables.
Subject was offusively friendly although quite shy in his greetings. His accent
is artremely strong, bearing some resemblance to any Slavic group but with ocто
other influence as well. He is approximately fifty (both in appearance and in
actual age), wears horn-rimmed glasses, summer-weight civilian clothes, and
with a great shook of very white hair, worn long.
We cat in a circle (except for Mro. ARANETA, who withdrew immediately). Tho
OECHOP can also departed very soon after our arrival with apologica and ox-
planations of another engagement. Subject spread a small map on the floor and
begen pointing out the areas of Communist influence and control (all of which
were marked in chades of red) and the potential victims of the next Communist
insuroicas against the West. He focussed his attention (and ours) on Indo-
China and India.
Subjest circulated a quantity of pamphlets and brochures or magasinsa in various
Languages. He déplained that he had personally picked these up in the course of
a very few days opent recently in India, there he had been visiting villages
and talking with people. Ho peinted cut that aleost all the publications were
produced in Nosacs and the remainder in Felping. He continued by saying that
the Commalato (Russian or Chicaso) have a completo monspaly in books and all
types of printed matter in India today, particularly in the czallor tons and
villages. Most of these publications are circulated free acne of them cost
two or three or four canahs, some are in Englich, others are in the various
dlalcato. They are on overy conceivable subject and are designed for all ages.
22
Enel H
COPY
21134
ENEG
ALGATURE CARD REPRODUCTIONS
14-00000
Secret
gibjest explained that in India (and in Indo-China) these publications are being
pered into the smallest healeto like a flood from Noscou and Peiping. The
purple don't have to esak reading materials, nor do they have to go far for en
explanation of what these pamphlets contain. "Leaderm" or "cadres" are overy-
vitare to explain the material, particularly in the schools and among youths and
students.
?
He caid (in answer to a question) that he had seen acne US-produced materials
in these areas, but that they were almost impossible to find in the outlying
areas. He pointed out that the Ceraunist matoriale vore cleverly done and in
come cases, beautiful oxamples of printing and propaganda presentation.
Subject etated that he io new most interested in the Haiphong and Hanoi areas
of Indo-China because these will be turned over to the Comuniste very soon
for their control. ils stated that his idea is to flood those critical places
which face the Communist tido momentarily with as much anti-matorialistic, pro-
Christian reading material as possible. He hopes thereby to "immunise" the
minds of the cimple peasants and masses of people against the appeals of
atholotio Communism and materialistic dcotrinos which they teach which turn
ken against western ideas and civilisation. He displayed coveral examples of
what he had in mind. He pointed out that these publications (one of these vas
a thin, multi-color French magazine entitled "Diou Existe" ("There is a God")
which be had acquired in Paris, and which he had given to "come friends" in
Saigon to translate into North Vietnamese dialects as soon as possible, along
with a fou other items of a similar nature.
He then explained that in these critical border areas of Indo-China there are
cany Catholics who will soon be completely isolated from the West by the
Communists. It is his idea to reach these people before it is too late "through
cur friends thoro" whom he described as Catholic laymen and priests or just
plein people who were willing to assist in this work. The task is simple, end
carely involves passing along reading materials to other known friends for
further circulation as broadly as possiblo. These people have the capability
to handlo "large quantitico" of this material, he claimed, "The leaders" are
among them to tell them how. He did not explain who had instrusted the
leaders, or what they know, or who they were, in fact. He stated that this
was, in effcot, "underground activity" and as such could not be described in
any detail to anyone who was not "on the ground." He compared it to an ico-
tang ghile, admitting that he was the principal leader and motivating force.
He explained that he has "holpful frienda" in Paris and Rome and Belgium and
cther places who had been aware of his activities cince he began in 1953. He
stated that in this period, they had assisted his efforts working from Romd
principally into Poland and Deechoslovakio end to a lesser extent, Yugoslavia,
Hungary and Rezania. In fact, ho cought to introduce "materiale" wherever he
could behind the Iran Qurtain, by whatóvar means. He explained that his work
was inawa to (Cortina)) PISSERANT (when he identified only vaguely as "ecaзопа
whese cativitica va certainly know about"), end to soma Americans as well,
including our cum Anbassador to Italy, (iro) Clare BoothEOCE. He had just
rated from Rome. He had gone to Saigon in October 1954 to begin his efforts
intas country. He toured the cutlying areas for some weeks before proceeding
to Ramo via India. On returning, he had again stopped in India and then
proceeded to Saigon.
AFORTURE CARD REPRODUCTIONS
14-00000
Secret
The inspiration to come to Manila to cook help had come from "ceveral Jesuit
friends chaa te kaow here from their former contacts in China. He had been in
Ohim fra 1946 to 1949-50, when ho had been fereed to leave for Taiwan. Ho
remained thoro until 1952, when he had had a heart attack and was forced to
go to Rams for a rest. He had had many friends on faiwan and had "spent ecze
Сава" ещANO Kai-shek explaining his ideas for using Taiwan as a base for
"an ideological conquest of the mainland" to reach the millions of Chinese whoa
the Cowmnists had not yet won.
Ha caid hio inferestion indicated that a million guerrilles vero active through-
cut China as late as 1952-53, but now it was too late. CHIANO ha described as
a ghost, a shadow, a legend who was completely out of touch even with things
in Taiwan. The Gimo's son,CHHANG Ching-huo, controlled overything: he was
trained in Moscow, was formerly a Communiot, but was not one now. However, he
was a ruthless, cynicał tyrant who would soon dominate completely. He referred
to the idea of the Nationalists returning to the mainland as "the wildest
felly - utterly absurd and fantastic." by this time we were seated at the
table for dinner. Mro. ARANETA let slip ("Father.") 08
Subject went on to describe the techniques and patterns of Communist conquest
And policy. He explained that he had been a partisan leader in Yugoslavia and
vant on to explain the Tito position at longth, decrying the acceptance of
"titoiom as a break fran Hoscow when it was merely an accommodation. He spoke
of his travels in the USSR after the end of World War il and of his determination
to go to the Far East to work against Communion. He admitted, in response to a
question, that he held an (italian passport: "Tito did not want me to leave."
11
The discussion went on to a lengthy examination by Subject of Soviet plans and
purposes, as he perceived then from his own personal exposure to Soviet militariste
during the war and to thoir political commissara and cadres at home and abroad
and at all lovels for years. His review was sometimes incisivo, cozetimes
dangerously oversimplified. "They could take Burza or Thailand tonight by
tolephone, and Formosa tomorrow night, the same way. But they won't." He
explained the Soviot policy as calculated to build up NEHRU as a world figure,
which was succeeding, since ho was corving their purposes abroad beautifully,
although he io losing very fant at home. The Congress Party is shot through
with Comunists. It is only a matter of time until it is completely a Communist
crgen.
The USSR did not want a shooting war; they will continue a policy of promoting
little wars to bleed US strength and buy time. They are building atomic strength.
In 1947, ba bad told General GROVE that he knew that every loading castern
Europcen atomic scientist was at work in the USSR and that it rast be assured
that they had the bomb, TRUMAN did not admit this until September 1949. He
lavered (this point was checked by questions) some taken atomic bombing by the
US of Seviot contera of industry to dator them from their immediate and long
range purposes and to shake the regime from within. Paramilitary (sic) or other
type action, through whatever vehicle, would be dissipated to the winds - would
coklove nothing but buy a minute of tico - unless it was coordinated on a world
scale. The June 1953 East German riots were our opportunity, the West wissed
it by not pouring in machineguns instead of wellwishes by radio.
Secret
AFERTURE CARD REPRODUCTIONS)
14-00000
Secret
(EPSA-3497
22
Asked what he wanted from us (or hoped to get, or needed most, or would settle
for) he said he would like to be able to print Literature for distribution in
Haiphong-Hanoi ismediately. "We have until the end of April." He thought his
cantasts and friends could handle 300,000 copies -- this figure took several
cesando to come out. He knew there was some capability for this in the USIS
mechanism here, which had some regional responsibility. Ho doubted that the
typefaces for Vietnamese dialects were available here (this point was raised
to discover if possible what inquiries he had made). He has a "planeload"
(a quantity, he admitted on questioning) of books and pamphlets collected for
him in Bolgiua and France for distribution in Indo-China.
Ho asked if it would be possible for him to coe MIDWATCH before he (Subject)
left for Saigon. He realised that Chief ODACID had had very little time while
he was here and thus had no hope of seeing him. He would wait until ap-
proximately 7-8 March to see MilWATCH if possible. No promises of an appoint-
ment were made.
Ho gave ons copy of the French-language publication as an example of what bo
had in mind for circulation. It was explained to him (and to the Secretary)
that we were in no position to make any sort of commitment, but that we would
bring his story to the attention of the proper people at ODACID, oventually
including, if possible, Chief OLACID, by normal channels to headquarters city.
This was very gratifying to both men. They thanked us profusely.
a
of When we were leaving, the Secretary followed us out to the elevator. He ex
plained that this man was, in fact, & priest
Jesuit uit but had asked for
Kolease from the order to enable him to carry on this work. He accepted
Subject'o bona fidea as a result of the assurances of (other Jesuits? He (the
Secretary) hoped we could arrange some assistance for this cause. Parting was
very cordial.
Subject makes a very strong impression for his tremendous spirit of dedication
to his task. He is a strong personality with considerable intelligence, but his
manner is very reserved and rathar shy. His shyness may derive in some measure
from the linguistic barrior; his English is quite limited, and several times he
used French words or expressions without apparently being aware of this.
Subject does not appear to be well physically, is extremely nervous, and ate
very little at dinner. He was not at esse in this social situation.
Accret
201-240
ANSTITUSE CARD REPRODUCTIONS