14-00000
104-10181-10197
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25 CC
TO
Director
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Attention: Mr. S. J. Papich
FROM
: Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT: Alpha 66 Organization and Plans
1. Reference is made to this Agency's teletype OUT 84747 of
6 October 1962, subject. Current Plans of Alpha 66.
2. The following information concerning Alpha 66, a Cuban
counterrevolutionary group, was received on 7 September 1962 by
another office of this Agency from a source whose reliability is unknown.
a. Alpha 66 is incorporated under the laws of Puerto
Rico and is comprised of Cuban certified public account-
ants in exile, for the most part living in San Juan, but
with some representatives in New York and Miami. It is
dedicated to sabotage, harrassment and similar hit and
run type commando operations against the Castro regime
in Cuba and intends to carry out six to eight such forrays
in the coming months. The first of these is reportedly
already planned in detail and will go into effect in the not
too distant future, stemming from some undisclosed island
base in the Caribbean. This organization has no political
aspirations and does not look forward to any position or
representation in a postwar Cuban provisional government.
b. To date all of the support for this organization
has come primarily from private sources and they are
anxious to accept contributions from any interested sup-
porter. They have no aversion to working with the United
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
14-00000
-2-
States Government if it will serve their best interests, how-
ever, with or without United States Government coordination
and/or support they intend to go ahead with their plans.
This organization does need more money and equipment
for future operations which may have to wait until they can
get the resources that they need. Their criticism to date
of all other Cuban exile groups is that they have wanted
power, money, and position. Because this group wants
none of these, except supplies and cash to get their harrass-
ment projects underway, they are, therefore, only tell-
ing what they must to convince interested helpers of their
seriousness and intent and will disclose only what they
must of their plans to assure them success of this purely
aggressive, retaliatory, harrassment organization. They
claim they want nothing to do with the student group organ-
ization which recently shelled Habana. As ex-CPA's their
very businesslike manner requires them to give receipts
for any funds received for help.
c. They now have enough supplies to carry out their
first operation successfully and maybe one other. The
organization purchased these supplies in Europe to avoid
being identified with strictly United States support and
endorsement. They have approximately $30,000.00 which
they collected from private, business subscribers, but
obviously need more to go ahead after the first attack. At
the present time they have one boat, but need more for
future operations. They plan to use six to ten men per
operation, and all of their training has so far been carried
out in Puerto Rico. According to their contact man in New
York, one of their first operations is to blow up all the
power stations in Cuba.
d. Their personnel in the executive or leadership
phase, although some are doubtless in the operational
phase as well, are as follows:
(1) In New York their leader is Alberto
GUTLAREZ de la Solana who is employed by
the magazine Bohemia and Vanidades, in the
Lincoln Building, as treasurer,
SECRET
14-00000
-3-
(2) In San Juan, Puerto Rico, the leader
is Jeronimo ESTEVE. He was a former leader
of the Catholic Family group in New York, (sic)
(3) Another officer in New York is Ramon
PEREZ Daple, office manager of the firm,
Olavarria, and Antonio VECIDVA Blanch, vice
president. (sic)
(4) Other officers in Puerto Rico are Dr.
Raul JANES, an oculist, J. J. MURAPOTTO,
former vice president of the Trust Company
of Cuba, and Roberto CASTELLON.
(5) Still other members in Puerto Rico are
Ricardo GONZALEZ Porta, Pedro MUINA, and
Father Miguel HERNANDEZ (a Catholic priest).
Their positions are not known.
e. In addition to the officers in New York and San Juan
which are listed above, they have a hard core of forty five
combat personnel trained in guerrilla operations who are
now in Puerto Rico awaiting their go-ahead signal. They
also have two ex-army men from Cuba, a former Batista
officer who later was in CASTRO's original army, and the
other a Castro officer who is known as the military com-
mander and operations office, who have directed the train-
ing and will carry out the operations when ready.
3. The records of this Agency reveal that a Dr. Ramon DAPLE,
possibly identical with Ramon PEREZ Daple, resides at 173 West Street,
Hazel Crest, Illinois, and is an assistant to Dr. Jose LAUS GONZALEZ.
In August 1952 these men were reported by an untested source to be infil-
trated Castroite Cubans even though they are noted in Hazel Crest for
their anti-Communist activities. This information was previously passed
to the Bureau and the Immigration and Naturalization Service in this
Agency's CSCI-3/772, 891 of 1 October 1962.
4. Records of this Agency reveal that one Antonio Carion VECIANA
Blanch, probably identical with Antonio VECIDVA Blanch, was born on
18 October 1928 in Cuba. VECIANA's connection with the Alpha 68 organ-
ization was disseminated in this Agency's teletype OUT 746049
SECRET
14-00000
-4-
Engraver 1962
a. This Agency's records reveal that Pedro MUINA Core,
probably identical with Pedro MUINA above, was born on 15 January
1889 in Asturias, Cuba. His occupation was listed as public accountant.
Data on file show him as president of the corporation and (sic) Antonio
bre tisanesera, Vice president of Lavertonte Kansas, and Director
of Autos Internacionales, S. A.
b. This office has no further pertinent additional information
on the above individuals. Any additional information which may come
to the attention of this Agency will be forwarded to the addressee.
C-1/773,30
se: Department of Justice (security)
Central Intelligence Agency
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Immigration and Naturalization Service
Bureau of International Programs, Department of Commerce
22 October 1962
TFW/CI/LFredricksen/sab
Distribution:
Orig & 1- Addressee
1- State
1 - DIA
1 - Army
1 - Navy
1 - Air Force
1 - INS
1 - Customs
1 - International Programs No.
1 - IWO
1 - AD CI
1 - CL
1 - CIA
Based on: C-3,235, 549
31 August 1962
CO-A-3,235, 950
7 September 1962
A complete RI Travel
individual's mentioned above
201-290837 (MUINA)
201-31266 VECIANA
19-300 3
06.08
Source:
Robert A. PRAICHE!
US.
(New Jersey)