104-10128-10363
FILE-S
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Chairman, Honor Awards Board
Acting Security Advisor, HAB
SEP 25 1955
Honor Awards Recommendations
Ref: Memo for Chairman, HAB dtd 12 Sept 56 from Mr. Robert M. Gaynor •
Subject: Approval of Pending Honor Awards Recommendations
1. Reference memo requested that the Acting Security
Advisor to the HAB review the cases contained therein to determine
if the citations and awards, when proffered, may be retained by the
recipients. With respect to this request, the following recommendations
are submitted:
a. Recommendation by the Security Advisor to the
HAB that awards and citations should not be physically
released into the recipient's personal custody if FCS
overseas until he returns to Headquarters PCS is confirmed.
In such cases there will be no security objections to
notifying the individual that he had been awarded the medal.
Such notification should inform the recipient of any
appropriate security restrictions relating to the award.
03.
03
(1) First Presentation: Roger Goiran,
George A. Carroll, Joseph C. Goodwin, Charles 03
T. E. Bobannon. There would be no security ob-
jections to giving the citation and award into their
personal custody subject to paragraph la above.
However, with respect to Mr. Goodwin, it is
recommended that upon his return FCS to the States,
his case be reviewed for possible security and cover
implications before physically releasing into his
personal custody the citation and award. The above
with respect to Goiran, Carroll and Goodwin has the
informal concurrence of the Deputy Chief, NEA
Division. The Deputy Chief, FE Division informally
concurred in the above regarding Mr. Bohannon)
०३
6/P
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
14-00000
SUBJECT: Honor Awards Recommendations
40696.
:
:
03
03 (2) Second Presentation: Earl M. Marter
(Theodore J. Roussos. The Deputy Chief, SE Division
on 21 September 1956 recommended informally that
for operational reasons the matter of giving the
citations and awards into their personal custody
be determined at some later date.
03
03
(3) Third Presentation: John E. Shirley,
Melville M. Fruit, James W. Leir Recommendation
contained in paragraph la above, 03
03
(4) Fourth Presentation: Tracy C. Davies,
Eano R. Hobbing, Henry D. Mock, David A.
Phillips, Nester D. Sanches, Charles W. Yaciw.] 03
There would be no security objections to giving
these citations and awards into their personal
custody subject to paragraph la above and certain
stipulations as prescribed below by the division
concerned.
(a) The Deputy Chief, WH Division
informally recommended on 21 September 1956
that the citations pertaining to the above
persons should be marked "CIA internal
Use Only". (It is noted that the project with
which these awards are concerned was within
the jurisdiction of the WH Division.)
(b) The Deputy Chief, WH Division
also stated that Mr. Phillips is now under
non-official cover and he informally requested
that the citation and award not be physically
released into Mr. Phillips' personal custody
while he is under cover and also requested
that this matter be reviewed at some later date.
(c) Regarding Mr. Sanches, the Deputy
Chief, NEA informally requested that since
Mr. Sanches was out of the States PCS for
8/
1400000
SUBJECT: Honor Awards Recommendations
that Division, that for security and cover reasons
the matter of physical release of both the
citation and award to Mr. Sanchez's personal
custody be considered upon his return PCS to
the States.
03
(d) Regarding Mr. Yaciw, a Com-
munications employee, the Deputy Chief,
Communications Division informally stated
on 21 September 1956 that for security and
cover reasons the matter of physical release
of both the citation and award to Mr. Yaciw'] 03
personal custody be considered upon his
return PCS to the States.
(e) The Deputy Chief, WH Division
informally recommended on 21 September
1956 that Mr. Hobbing be notified of his award
but neither the citation or award be physically
delivered into his personal custody.
03
(5) Fifth Presentation: Kenneth A. Knowles,
Robert P. Driscoll, Michael Burke, Lucian K. Truscott.
Recommendation contained in paragraph la above
except that in the case of Mr. Knowles, Colonel Boberg
of the Office of Basic Intelligence requested that
this citation be marked "CIA Internal Use Only".
03
03 (6) Sixth Presentation: Casimiro Barquin,
Abraham Vargas, Recommendation contained in
paragraph la above.
3 (7) Seventh Presentation: Philip G. Bower,
Nicholas de Transe samt J. Drakulich, Louis 03
G. Michael, Marguerite Merigold. Recommendation
contained in paragraph la above except that in the
case of Mr. Bower, Colonel Boberg of the Office of
Basic Intelligence requested that this citation be
marked "CIA Internal Use Only".
:
13/0
14-00000
7/
SUBJECT: Honor Awards Recommendations
03
83
03 (8) Eighth Presentation: Manford D. Frye,
Aloysius J. Lewis, James F. Wright, Jim Carini. 03
Recommendation contained in paragraph la above;
however, regarding Mr. Frye, the Executive Officer,
FE informally stated on 21 September 1956 that the
conditions as set forth in memo for Chairman, HAB
(Subject: Frye, Manford D. - Recommendation for
Intelligence Medal of Merit) from Security Advisor,
HAB, dated 7 June 1956, had not changed. In view
of this, he informally requested that the physical
release of the citation and award into the personal
custody of Mr. Frye not be made at this time.
03
(9) Ninth Presentation: William H. Marr
(posthumous). Recommendation by the
Security Advisor, HAB in his memo of 4 June 1956
with respect to the issuance of this award is confirmed,
2. In addition to the above, the matter of publicity regarding
these awards is pointed out.
Distribution:
Orig. & 1 - Adse.
31-CS Files
1-PS/OS Files
1 - Chrono
PS/PS: WWW:skh
03
William N. Wood