10.00000
104-10331-10201
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
CL BY: 492272
CL REASON: Section 1.5 C
DECL ON: X1
DRV FRM: HUM 4-82
From the Desk of Lee S. Strickland
Chief, Information Review Group / CIA
NOTE FOR:
Donald R. Cryer@DO
FROM:
Lee S. Strickland
OFFICE:
OIM
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Don,
09/29/98 11:39:08 AM
URGENT: Points for DDO Decision re JFK Board
As you know, OIM has been working with the JFK Board to ensure that all critical DO equities are
protected despite the Board's penchant to release everything even remotely related to the JFK
assassination. However, in the last few days of the Board's tenure, their demands have become more
strident and we need your approval on the following strategies for negotiations today.
1. The Walt Elder document. This is a summary of the Agency's entry into the French Embassy
in Washington with "Iden" substituted for the words "French" and the name of their intell rep. The details
left in the document reveal that it was an entry in Washington. We believe we may be able to have the
Board defer release if we provide an oral, classified briefing on the facts to the 5 cleared Board members
as we have on several other occasions this year on other matters. If you approve this classified briefing,
we would also advise the Board that if they do not agree to defer, we will, without question, recommend an
appeal to the President.
2. The Mexico City Station History. Largely agreed, the sticking points are a few segments
which contain the root part of the relevant crypt (LICASA) and other details which reflect that our asset
was the code clerk and that we got lots of good stuff, etc. We ask your concurrence to compromise on the
base of the crypt (CASA) since it reveals nothing more than has already been released BUT stand fast
and firm on the details of the source and the goodness of the take and tell the Board -- nicely of course
that they may release "CASA" but we will again go to the President on the remainder.
3. The Administrative Traffic. Surely one of their more ridiculous demands. However, they
have the authority and the precedent since the FBI gave them tons of such material. They want every
scrap of paper which documents the Agency's processing of the Board's requests. It could cover, for
example, all of my and your e-mail which concerns the Board. We would like to say no and seek their
agreement by addressing only the 57 cables which concern our (and the Board's interaction) with the
Mexican service on their requests AND the 5 underlying declarations that were completed recently and
which formed the basis for the ExDir's public declaration. Each of these documents would be properly
redacted before release. This is a prudent compromise in my view since it well preserves the CIA's
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
position that internal deliberative type documents will not be released (as in the Chester II ISCAP case).
These strategies have been developed by Barry Harrelson, the DO's JFK Team, and Chuck
Briggs who is our most senior annuitant on the project. Ed Cohen and I agree that these positions make
sense from a perspective of best protecting core DO equities. We need your approval on the above
approaches and any similar compromises that may be necessary today and tomorrow as we move in a
"white heat" on the Board's final demands in the closing days of their tenure.
Many Thanks.
LEE
CC:
William H. McNair@DO
Gloria Boyd@DO
Ramona Dunn-C-@DCI (bcc: James R. Oliver)
Sent on 29 September 1998 at 11:39:08 AM
SECRET

