14-00000
104-10221-10220
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
ضا
In Reply, Please Refer to
File No
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
DBA 37829
Miami, Florida
APR 10 1963
CONFIDENTIAL
RE: EJERCITO CUBANO ANTICOMUNISTA
(FRENTE ESCAMBRAY)
(CUBAN ANTI-COMMUNIST ARMY)
(ESCAMBRAY FRONT);
INTERNAL SECURITY
CUBA;
REGISTRATION ACT - CUBA;
NEUTRALITY MATTER.
On April 4, 1963, MM T-1, who has furnished re-
liable information in the past, obtained information from
a source who is involved with American criminal elements
in New York and Miami, who obtained information from an
unknown source, whose reliability is unknown, but who is
in a position to furnish some information concerning this
matter.
201-242256
It was reported that in the late evening hours of
April 3, 1963, Frank Anthony Sturgis, also known as Prank
Fiorial, an American soldier of fortune involved in Cuban
revolutionary activities, reportedly stated that until re-
cently, the "Violyn III" had been located in Naples, Florida,
under Fiorini's control. Fiorini continued that an infiltra-
tion mission was planned by Fiorini and Evelio Duque (matro-
nyaic; name unknown), wherein Duque and his men would infiltrate
into Cubs to engage in guerrilla activities against the Cuban
CONFIDENTIAL
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification.
261-242256
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
RE: EJERCITO CUBANO ANTICOMUNISTA
Covernment, and Fiorini would later supply them by air-
plane from the United States. Duque was described as a
Cuban exile residing in Miami, Florida, who is active in
enti-Castro activities.
:
Fiorini claimed to have arranged for the use
of the boat "Violyn III," and made the arrangements with
the omer, Alexander I. Rorke, Jr., free lance newspaper
man, who has been periodically involved in Cuban revolu-
tionary activities. Rorke agreed to allow Fiorini use of
the boat if, in return, Rorke's organization, U. S. Freedom
Pighters, would receive credit for any success accomplished
by Fiorini.
Later, this boat was moved to Marco, Florida,
on the Gulf of Mexico side of Florida. Thereafter, Rorke
changed his mind and wanted the boat back, but Fiorini
claimed he did not know where the boat was, or where it had
zone. Ecme time later, the "Violyn III" and another large
test left the Florida area.
After the "Violya III" left from somewhere on the
West Coast of Florida, Frank Fiorini, along with airplane
pilot Bill Johnson and Jerry Buchanan, an American adventurer,
rented a small boat and wet the "Violyn III" and the other
large boat at sea. The small boat loaded on to the two lar-
ger boats gasoline and food. Jerry Buchanan, at that time,
CONFIDENTIAL
:
-2-
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
RE: EJERCITO CUBANO ANTICOMUNISTA
boarde. the "Violyn III." The two larger boats then
departed for an unknown destination. Fiorini and Johnson
returned to Florida in the small boat.
121 T-2, a confidential source_abroad, on March 30,
1963, advised that Frank Fiorini, Bill Johnson, and Jose Maria
Gonzalez Hernandez, a Cuban radio operator and technician,
arrived in Nassau on March 29, 1963, and stayed at the Pilot
Heuse Hotel. The following day, March 30, 1963, these three
porsons rented a plane and flew to Norman Key. That same day,
Britich authorities arrested them, and on the evening of
that day put them on a commercial airline for Miami, Florida.
On April 3, 1963, MM T-3, who has furnished reliable
information in the past, obtained some information from an
untested source with contacts in the Bahamas, who obtained
information from an unidentified person. He advised that it
was reported that several hours after Fiorini was arrested
on Norman Key, British authorities in the Bahamas stopped and
boarded the "Violyn III" and arrested some thirteen Cubans
and Jerry Buchanan who were aboard.
On April 4, 1963, MM T-3 advised that the British
authorities released the "Violyn III" and the crew, and in-
Structed them to proceed to Miami. The other boat which
originally accompanied the "Violyn III," name of this boat
unknown, escaped and was being sought by the British and the
United States Coast Guard.
:
CONFIDENTIAL
-3-
14-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
RE: EJERCITO CUBANO ANTICOMUNISTA
On April 4, 1963, Fiorini reportedly claimed that
he had been in radio contact with the above-mentioned uniden-
tified boat, and it was tied up at an island in the Bahamas,
exact location of which was not disclosed. The boat was re-
portedly camouflaged and heard the U. S. Coast Guard planes
flying above in an effort to locate it. Fiorini claimed he
could supply this unidentified boat with fuel and food, if
requested by this boat, and that he had available an Aero-
Commander airplane in Miami and two fast powerboats located
somewhere north of Miami. It was not known what manner of
radio communication was used by Fiorini to contact the un
identified boat.
::
On April 4, 1963, local newspaper, radio stations
and television stations in Miami, Florida, reported that the
"Violyn III" had departed from Nassau and was enroute to
Miami with a U. S. Coast Guard escort. Miami Attorney Charles
R. Ashmann made press announcements that the crew of the "Vio-
lyn III" would not return to the United States.
In the early morning hours of April 5, 1963, MA T-3
advised that Ashmann claimed the "Violyn III" would rendez-
vous with the other unidentified boat and would complete its
infiltration mission to Cuba.
On April 5, 1963, MM T-4, a representative of another
Government agency, advised that on the afternoon of April 4,
1963, the "Violyn III" left Nassau, Bahamas, on a general course
for the United States, and at that date was at the north tip of
CONFIDENTIAL
-4-
1
14-00000
DBA 37829
CONFIDENTIAL
RE: EJERCITO CUBANO ANTICOMUNISTA
Andros Island in the Bahamas. Because the "Violyn III"
was in shallow water, the U. S. Coast Guard discontinued
its surveillance of the "Violyn III" by boat, and the sur-
veillance was taken over by U. S. Coast Guard aircraft.
At about 8:20 P.M., the "Violyn III" turned off its running
lights and had not been seen by the Coast Guard since that
time.
MM T-4 reported that there is a Sigma-type Cuban
fishing boat which was stopped near Williams Key off the
coast of Andrews Island on April 5, 1963. MM T-4 said this
Sigma boat was possibly the boat that was supposed to rendez-
vous with the "Violynn III" for an infiltration mission in-
to Cuba. There is an airplane landing strip at Williams Key.
which could not be used because someone had placed a great
quantity of rocks and driftwood on the runway.
On April 5, 1963, Mr. Chester A. Woish, Chief,
Investigations Branch, Immigration and Naturalization Service,
Hlami, advised that the "Violyn III" had just arrived at the
Deawall, Key Biscayne, Miami. The Cubans aboard were to be
taken by INS authorities to INS detention facility at Opa
Locka, Florida, where interviews were to be conducted, and
any United States citizens on board were to be taken by INS
authorities to INS Headquarters in Miami, where these indi-
viduals would be interviewed for any possible violations of
Federal law concerning U. S. passport regulations.
Property of FBI This document is loaned to you by
the FBI, and neither it nor its contents are to be distributed
outside the agency to which loaned.
CONFIDENTIAL
-5*-
:
14-00000
DL-37275
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
In Reply, Please Refer to
File No.
ap
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
April 8, 1963
MICROFILMED
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
APR 17 1963
DOC MICRO SER
The "Violyn III," a boat utilized by the Gorban
Anticommunist Army, Escambray Front, in its anti-Castro
activities, was recently captured by British authorities
together with a number of anti-Castro raiders. The boat
and the anti-Castro raiders have subsequently returned to
Miami, Florida.
In this connection en informant who has furnished
reliable information in the past on April 4, 1963, advised
is more commonly known as Frank Fiorint, a former Castro
supporter and an American soldier of fortune who has been
engaged in anti-Castro endeavors since his break with the
Castro regime, stated that until recently the "Violyn III"
had been located at. Naples, Florida, under Fiorini's control.
An infiltration mission had been planned by Fiorint and
Evelio Duque, leader of the Cuban Anticommunist Army, Escambray
Front, whereby Duque and his men would infiltrate into Guba
and would later be supplied by Fiorini by plane from the
United States.
Fiorini stated he had arranged with Alexander I.
Rorke, Jr., a free-lance newspaperman who has been involved
in anti-Castro activities, for the use of the "Violyn III."
Rorke permitted the use of this boat but stated that he
wanted his organization, the U. S. Freedom Fighters, to
receive some of the credit for any successes achieved.
Rorke subsequently changed his mind and wanted the boat back
but Fiorini claimed that it had departed and that he did not
know where it was.
ا
019-9-9/1
CS COPY
201-242256
14-00000
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
marl
(111207-
LUA 37275
Sometime later the "Violyn III"sand another boat
left the Florida area. On the day of the departure of these
vessels, Fiorini, Bill Johnson, a pilot, and Jerry Buchanan,
an adventurer, rented a small boat and made a rendezvous with
the other two boats at sea. Buchanan transferred to one of
these two vessels and gasoline and food supplies which had
been on the small boat were loaded aboard these two vessels.
Fiorini and Johnson then returned to Florida in the rented
boat and the other two continued on their way.
101-25184.2
201-251512
Subsequently Fiorini, Johnson and Jose Maria
Gonzalez Hernandez, a Cuban radio operator, proceeded to
Nassau, Bahamas, rented a plane and flew to Norman Key in
the Bahamas. Immediately thereafter this group was arrested
by British authorities who sent them back to Miami, Florida.
Several hours after Fiorini was arrested on Norman Key, the
British stopped and boarded the "Violyn III" and arrested
Buchanan and a number of Cubans who were aboard. On
April 4, 1963, the British released the "Violyn III" and its
crew with instructions that they should proceed to Miami.
The other boat escaped, REACTOTORO of Group NooN AS CORN
ANT.COMMUNIST Ring. ESEIMBRAY FRONT
On April 4, 1963, Fiorini claimed he had been in
radio contact with the boat that had escaped and that it was
then docked at an island in the Bahamas. Fiorini did not
disclose the exact location of the boat but claimed he could
supply it with food and fuel if requested and that he had an
airplane and two fast power boats available in the Miami area,
-2-
14-00000
UNITED STATES DEPARTAMENT COF JUSTICE
SCOREC
NOLY
①
:
-CAST
CUA CO FOREX C
EC-CU
NTRY TER
201-242256
Ca March 26, 1953, № 1-2, a representative of a
Hudavel agency which conducts intelligence investigacions,
famished the following information, described as having
bon received by a U. S. observer from FRANK FIOREMI.
): כס be noted the FRANK FIORINI do ca American soldier
of fortune who has been involved in Cuben revolutionary
cecivicsco in the past in the Mami arca):
23 6:00 2.1., on March 25, 1953, 180 3ooc Long
chip was scheduled to leave the Miami avec to rondevous with
veral oil becce somewhere south of Florida. This Flotilla
Lammed vo akire Orience Province to Cuba's south coast.
A lauge cautko agadnes saugers in Cuba is being
phammed by a group of CAS orgenteastons in exila
Cho Wook 15. This p00201-267043
20 podly under the command of FELIS VIOL SANTAGO
de i involve alemance of cho Unidad Revolucionaria (UR),
cha Novintomto Descrete Crieciens (in 100 cestom headed by
LAORDINO DAI FALL) and a group houded by Comandante
DR, who had just arrived it from Peerco
Finances wore reportedly armenged for by JULIO LOSO
and coO BOSCH AVILA.
The over-all plan calle for a diversionary attack
on a Cuban chíp in or en route to Cuba. This cuscek is co
cover the actual purpose of the sorike which is to putachora
:
cucolicte damgrading
and declassiccion
14-00000
:-CASTRO STRACT COCA
סי כשבשכבנכסR WEEK 07 MARCH 25, 1953
2- Cube משום lending forces, ene under cucum in the Zecembray
cred and another in Oriente. After choco co forces are
Luccessfully infiltrated, they will be supplied by see th
operacions which will involve FRANK FICRINI.
On March 28, 1983, FELIPE VIDAL SANTIACO, 2993
Kowchwece 7th Street, Mand, who identified himself as Secretzzy
of the United Front of Nasional Liberacion, en cnct-CASTRO
organteccion with abous shree hundred members in the Kent ares;
sood to organisation : been in contact with a group of
noorground anti-CASTRO Cubans and guerrillas operating in
Province, who cred-pressed for supplies and
C. he had been melting plans to infiltrato
such mortale de chocs forces during the approximate time
of the week buginning March 25, bus chee his plans were
eancelled when the CASTRO zovemmene valdód and wiped cus
chice underground and guerilla forces in Macances Province.
VIDAL Benced that no a ale of whasa sevelopments, he and
his organisation no longer hoo communfeccions with the remnants
of chace people in Meteness Province and he does nos plan any
kind off opercuion at the precent time.
VIDAL Jaid his plans did not involve che, the
CC, or any veston headed by LAURDANO 202ESTA PALLA OF
Comandante ZVILIO PUCE, oven though he is on friendly
come witch co.
VIDAL Accorted chet as no cime did his piens
cated any autack on any Cuben or Russian boste or any other
ccnauci objectives and the picke ware intved strictly to the
motor of infilcowing and muggling aims and other wespons
to the Phove-mentioned groups in Name Province.
VIDAL stated that furthermore his organtection
does not com a boss at the present wine. His piens had
SECRET
-2-
の
14-00000
PHOLE
TONO SERVOSS-
SD FOR EX0738 26, 255
Sa processed upon the loan of a boss from an individual
when he declined so identify and who had kiled to produce
chis boat according to schedule. Therefore, VIDAL stained
he never had the cotusi capacity to carry out his plans which
never reached sha operational stage.
VIDAL advised the ha came : : United States
Auguse 9, 130, and since chen has pastelpaced in bour
coven doen wasion operacions to Cuba an
behalf of Magentacion in order to support underground
and guomila groupe ccccctened with as and ocher
ougeniacusons.
I= se to be noted that is a owan
aletten who was formerly one of the federe of a gu
omganteccion in the cambray awon of 0.
PROPERTY 07 721 - This momanden is loaned to
you by the " and watcher כל סס סם פעם שמן מנו מן
discuted outside the agency to whies Cccned.
!
3*