104-10123-10377
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
0-34
52144
James W. McCord
I, James W. McCord
, understand that by virtue of my
duties I may be the recipient of information, material and data which con-
cerns the security of the United States. This information is classified
according to the security standards set by the United States Government. I
am aware that the unauthorized disclosure of such information is prohibited
by the Espionage Laws, (18 USC Secs. 793 and 794), and the National Security
Act of 1947 which specifically requires the protection of the Classified Pro-
grams from unauthorized disclosure.
I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will never divulge, publish, or
reveal by word, conduct or by any other means such information or knowledge
concerning my present duties except when necessary to do so in the perform-
ance of my official duties and in accordance with the laws of the United
States, unless specifically authorized in writing in each and every case by a
duly authorized representative of the United States Government.
In the event of a change of duties, resignation or termination of my
services or any other change in my relationship, I understand that the pro-
visions of this oath will remain binding upon me.
I agree that in the event I am ever called upon to testify in a court
of law, administrative proceedings or other tribunal regarding information
within the scope of this oath, I will notify a duly authorized representative
of the United States Government immediately; I will also advise the court
or tribunal of my oath to the United States Government and request that
my need to testify be established before I am required to do so.
I understand that this oath will be retained by the United States Government
for its future use in any matter within the scope of this oath.
I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose
of evasion and in the absence of duress.
James W. McCord
(Signature)
CIA/DDS/OS
(Organization)
Security Officer
(Title)
16 Oct 63
(Date)
Witnessed By: George Milly
SECRET
03