104-10176-10005
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOK
PROCESSING ACTION
FOR INDEXING
TO
Chief, Western Hemisphere Division
Chief, WH/COG
FROM
Chief of Station, Mexico City
SUBJECT
PBRUMEN/Developments of the LIRING-3 Operation
References: A. MEXICO CITY 2322
B. MEXICO CITY 2331
C. MEXICO CITY 2358
D. MEXICO CITY 2363
E. MEXICO CITY 2396
1. Forwarded as Attachment One under separate cover are seven contact
reports by LIRING-3 on recent developments of the LIRING-3
Operation, dated 27 and 28 July, 1, 3 (two reports), 5 and 9 August 1967
(two reports). One of the reports dated 3 August is a monthly resume of
operational activities for the month of July. It is forwarded together with
the other reports rather than separately to give as complete a picture as
possible of LIRING-3's dealings with Hoises OROZCO Leal, the circumstances
in which the two men met and the reporting of these dealings by LIRING-3
to ROWTON. Forwarded as Attachment Two, also under separate cover, are
photo copies of a two page typewritten message left by OROZCO at LIRING-3's
apartment on 1 August. Another copy of this message is being forwarded
Guatemala City separately.
continued.......
Attachments:
I Seven Reports a/s para 1 UNDER SEPARATE COVER
II- Message Left by OROZCO UNDER SEPARATE COVER
Distribution:
2-C/WED w/atts USC
1-C/WE/COG w/o atts
4 - FILES
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
HDMA-32778
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET/KAPOK
201-798301
DATE
15 August 1967
HOS FILE NUMBER
201-798301
Excated from a
declassified
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOK
HDMA-32778
2. There is little question that LIRING-3 seized the opportunity given
him by the sudden apperition of OROZCO on the scene to cover vis a vis his
wife a few days of misbehaving. Instead of proceeding to Tapachuls to receive
from the FAR new contract instructions in Mexico City (an awkward arrangement
to say the least), LIRING-3 remained at the safe house he uses in the capital
to receive the visit (as indicated by LIFEAT) of Berta WICISSER his "regular"
mistress, Silvia DURAN (of Lee Earvey OSWALD fame) and possibly a certain
Yolanda (who appears for the first time in this operation and whose phone
number is not in the Station reversed Mexico City telephone directory)
Pinned down on the fact that he was in Mexico City during the period of 19
to 21 July, LIRING-3 admitted that he was but felt that he had to tell
another lie rather than admit his misbehavior. This lie was that he did not
want to appear dependant on Sergio VALDEZ in the eyes of ROWTON and so
made his first meeting with OROZCO "more intriguing" by inventing the trip
to Tapachula. To add credence to the Tapachula story, LIRING-3 previously
asked his wife to impress ROWTON with her concern for his, telling ROWTON
that he had disappeared for three days without telling her where he went.
This she did very convincingly with much sobbing and crying. The LIROSIN
LP which continues to experience technical difficulties now and then did not
operate properly that day (it's recorder broke down) but, as luck will have
it LIROSIN live monitored conversation between LIRING-3 and his wife
during which the latter reported that her tears seemed to have convinced
ROWTON and on what one had come to retry hint talk with
LIRING-3 concerned the mention of the alias which ROWTON uses with LIRING-3
and 4 to various persons with whom LIRING-3 is in touch. LIFEAT coverage
had indicated, for example, that LIRING-3 mentioned BOSTON in alias to
Sergio VALDEZ. This LIRING-3 denied. He produced on 3 August 1967 a
written review of all the people of interest to ROWTON with whom he has
been in contact indicating whether or not he mentioned ROWTON's alias to
them. This review is attached to one of ROWTON's reports dated 9 August.
3. What happened between OROZCO, LIRING-3, Sergio VALDEZ and Raul
MORENO is explained in detail in ROWTON's reports forwarded with this
dispatch. A few additional points should probably be made here. First of
all, part of the first meeting between LIRING-3 and OROZCO at LIRING-3's
safehouse was live monitored by LIROSIN when the latter returned home from
his regular bartending job in the early hours of the morning. LIROSIN
heard enough (his recorder was once more inoperative) to basically confirm
LIRING-3's report of his meeting with OROZCO to ROWTON. Secondly, neither
VALDEZ nor MORENO were present during the night of 31 July-1 August when
LIRING-3 told OROZCO that the latter was in fact a deserter from the FAR,
refusing to indicate how he knew this (ROWTON had passed LIRING-3 information
on OROZCO received by the Station from both LIREBEL-1 and 2). The two men
arrived at LIRING-3's apartment in the early morning hours when OROZCO
had admitted everything and thus do not know what prompted him to tell the
truth. Thirdly, LIRING-3 insists that he told OROZCO nothing about his
plastic flower business and its contemplated use to cover activities in
support of the Guatemalan rebels. According to him, OROZCO already knew
this as well as other details of his dealings with the FAR. LIRING-3
presumes that OROZCO learned this from the higher-ups of the FAR guerrillas
while in the hills. OROZCO mistakenly apparently thought that LIRING-3 was
in the actual arms procurement business whereas his discussions with the
FAR have been limited up to now to the eventual transportation of FAR
acquired supplies from Northern Mexico to Guatemala (with the FAR assuming
the responsibility of smuggling these supplies over the Guatemalan border).
LIRING-3's plastic flower business designed to cover support activities on
behalf of the FAR, is not, as a matter of fact operative yet. Thus OROZCO
was badly informed of LIRING-3's activities. How OROZCO hoped to obtain arms
from LIRING-3, had the latter been able to deliver some at the Guatemalan
border area, in view of the fact (as he later admitted) that he was stone
broke, is a matter of conjecture. A desperate man may do desperate things
and LIRING-3 could have found himself in serious trouble. Judging from the
FAR's shooting habits it is a good thing in any case that OROZCO was not
armed during the argument at LIRING-3's apartment the night of 31 July to
1 August, particularly when VALDEZ started to threaten him.
CLASSIFICATION
FORM
196
53a
USE PREVIOUS EDITION
SECRET/KAPOK
CONTINUED
PAGE NO
TWO
4. This Station believes that the LIRING-3 Operation has reached a
critical point as a result of the OROZCO affair. Both the Cubans and the
FAR (via Ernesto CAPUANO Del Vecchio) have been notified by LIRING-3 of
OROZCO's conduct and statements (a copy of OROZCO's message forwarded as
Attachment Two was given CAPUANO). If the FAR is at all interested in
LIRING-3 he will somehow hear from the Guatemalan guerrillas and negotiations
concerning arms and equipment will be rearmed. LIRING-3 has not heard from
GARCIA since June and does not even know if the latter is in Mexico.
It is the Station's opinion that he probably will hear nothing directly
from the Cubans.
5. Headquarters will note, per ROWTON's report dated 28 July, the
relative ease with which LIRING-3 claims to be obtaining a false passport
and other identity papers. The Cuban's passports that LIRING-3 purchased
in Nuevo Laredo, mentioned in the same report, were issued in 1953 and 1959
and may be of marginal value. They will nevertheless be forwarded to
Headquarters together with other documentation held by the bearers of these
passports.
"Cos-cic" is erbe
Jr. CASTILLO RA
Dined CASCA?
Remne BERMUDE & Mallo
Maris Inn?
Veierten Irave? - no tres in Crozes-
Kagerond A Frootgan.
for Willard C. CURTIS
CLASSIFICATION
FORM
196
53b
USE PREVIOUS EDITION
SECRET/KAPOK
PAGE NO
THREE
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
SECRET/KAPOK
HDMA-32778
TALLER DE VITRALES
PLAZA MIRAVALLE 3
MEXICO, D.F.
COPY
att No. II to Hmma-22778, 15 august 1967 201-798301
DE VITRALES
MEXICO...
TALLER
PLAZA MIRAVALLE
03
en lo
0.00
08
7
مت
13
:
む
ひいい
4
Cu Ja
yo e
२१
٠٧٢
13 To estoy toda
حصار derde canto de vista,
ua deća si e curato con el ap:וכבי
CG
puede juegar, la colliard wc0c1a &
:
ל
01 בן ? oppou Lang
respeto y de lo que enc
la etapa is criella yaasee 02 607 47 כיום
mo era cada a vila ze in de
cepetere Fastב
haciendo locus cons כי הן בנס כן סי בי
.
he claro renteligenta que chos de ce am iero que chos
yas he tenido pela en la espace
בפני רכב
tata siis discreto ?תל אב emitido ca 2002
tortene y de 30 a vila ja
ca
en dus este com jus 20 סני: כבוס נסב robra vivir
Ja que la hice cuirir les mesical ::10 יום בית
ran a la zone le podrian echar la cala, 7 laga a fade c
antieco en la historia s las rotoluciona
וכניס סכ τοτοατομοςςας τις συ
a pesar de que los deatteca ce cuidad
Dete ea lop mates rares, la rosion of
1 1 2
io
ddo a recte de 1000
y sin
A
:
ha tenido cca ci persesa si uda. 20 cm. centesi
alelare con el dolor de ter que astea por 1 bl
:
:
;;
20
12
en
las realidades, entomes
2.
103
OTORES DE LA VERAD S
$
جمع
252
ra
عدد
se perdie la iniciativa por
mco gera pare en teha sa pieterritos nas
Jes,dice Cas verdades y es eunion, cana
3
20 ata ao estapecs, 000 100 20 30 40 eta
, me honde en fin yo no
mare zara tera
que es revolusions porque enreito de lגי : : ermaie padrin
uio for easy conta gente de propterasuidado
coro yo quiero caer por algo co הכק penicjo; pape...
strelistico de seguridad no regress, o sa sit scale defeder
כבד greso estoy dispuesto a tocar el camino que siempre se a
pertenecie.como parte del novicente, 31 תיביה ac 10 que les
pueda cara util estoyasus ordenes previa discutacacast, los
telefones y as cosas las quems por seguradau, so es descontiana
8120 sepricad.
27 July, 1967
1. LIRING/3 reported to Roxton at brief preliminary debriefing that during
Rowton absence a Guatemalan (unidentified) telephoned him a safehouse and
instructed him to go to Tapachula on 19 July and await contact in lobby of local
moviehouse. LIRING/3 stated that he took trip and was approached in lobby
by same xxxxx young Guatemalan woman (with oriental features) who he had
met in Guatemala City during his last trip. This woman simply informed him
that a comrade would contact him (L/3) at his home in next few days and
discuss future operations. L/3 continued that he returned to Mexico
City next day and was contacted at his home by Guatemalan aged about 45,
mustache, glasses, balding head, slightly hooked nose, wearing hat xxxxxxxx
who later stated his true name is Moises Crozco Leal and that he has been
in Mexico past twenty years.
2. At meeting next day in safehouse Crozco informed L/3 that he ordered by
Montes group to establish contact with L/3 in order expedite first shipment
of arms and ammo which urgently needed. Then L/3 mentioned possibility air-
lift from San Cristóbal area through small privately chartered plane, Orozco
intensely interested and acceded to L/3 request that he first meet with
"responsible high-level" FAR representatives. Crozco stated that in his
opinion L/3 should discuss whole operation with Montes himself and volun-
teered to arrange meeting in near future.
3. LIRING/3 states that he is awaiting further instructions from Crozco and
is prepared for trip to Chiapas once final arrangements made.
4. Re Garcia L/3 reported that he has not reappeared and when he queried
Orozco about him, xxxxx Orozco stated be personally not acquainted with him,
since strict compartmentation being enforced. Also in course of conversation
Orozco stated that only part of the medicines procured by L/3 had arrived at
their destination and its presumed that remainder was captured by Guate-
malan army. He added that FAR needed a doctor urgently for about ten days
and would appreciate L/3 arranging this if feasible. L/3 suggested to Rowton
that Raúl Moreno, who is in third year of medical studies, might qualify if
Rowton could not come up with fully qualified doctor.
5. Request traces Moises Crozco Leal.
2/5/c
CS COPY
MOISES
CROZCO
LEAL
RO AÑOS EN MEXICO
36-3845 EDAD APROX.
28 July 1967
Subject: Wallace B. Roxton Meeting with LIRING/3.
1. On the morning of 27 July 1967, the day after his return to Mexico
City, Roxton contacted LIRING/3 at his home and arranged for a meeting
at the safehouse at 1130 that same morning. L/3 commented that he was
greatly relieved that Roxton had returned safely since many things had
happened during his absence and L/3 had felt uncertain about what he should
do in the event Roxton had been delayed any longer.
2. At the 1130 meeting at the safehouse, LIRING/3 reported that he and
LIRING/4 had accompanied L/3's half brother in his car to Sabinas, Coah.,
(approx. 100 miles southwest of Monterrey, in the state of Coahuila). L/3
related that immediately on arrival he had his half-brother introduce him
as planned to the judge in Nueva Rosita, a small village near Sabinas. L/3
reported to Roxton that the judge is named Francisco Mario Valdez Hernández
and is actually a "Juez Menor" but also a notario público and an "agente
del Ministerio Público", and, as such, has authority to issue important
documents. According to L/3, judge Valdez, who gave the appearance of a
homosexual, spoke openly about his ability and willingness to issue false
documents and arrange for a passport for L/3 in the alias Alberto Zárate.
He promised to take care of the matter for the sum of 2,000 pesos, but ac-
cepted a down payment of 1,300 pesos and gave L/3 a receipt for this amount
"para el arreglo de un pasaporte mexicano", addressed to Alberto Zárate Vi-
dal. In addition LIRING/3's half-brother persuaded the judge to arrange
for the issuance to Alberto Zárate of an identity card showing that Zárate
was an "actuario" of the Ministry of Labor, and for a driver's license, so
that Zárate would have additional documents attesting to his identity.
3. LIRING/3 commented that he was certain that he could arrange for false
papers for Roxton in the event the latter felt he could use such papers.
L/3 continued that he and L/4 then proceeded to Nuevo Laredo and picked
up the three Cuban passports that his half-brother had purchased on his
behalf for the sum of 500 pesos. L/3 explained that although the persons
to whom the passports were issued were dead they might conceivably be of
use to Rowton in the future. He added that the hotel clerk who sold the
documents to his half-brother had originally asked 1,500 pesos but apparently
was glad to accept the 500 when it was offered in cash on the table.
4. LIRING/3 continued that he and L/4 returned to Mexico City on 14 July
taking the bus at Correo. L/3 then announced jubilantly that a few
days after his return, while he was visiting the safehouse in the hope
of Rowton's return or at least a telephone call, he received a telephone
call from an anonymous man, obviously a Guatemalan, who asked whether he
could make a trip to Tapachula in order to meet with a friend. When L/3
indicated that he could make the trip, the person instructed him to wait
in the lobby of the Figueroa movie house until he was approached by the
"friend". L/3 told Roxton that he then proceeded by train to Tapachula
(on 19 July) and waited in the lobby as instructed. To his great surprise,
he was approached by the same Guatemalan young woman who had met him in
Guatemala City in late January 1967, and told that a certain "Valen-
tín" would contact him at his home in Mexico City in the near future and
that this person was to be his new contact with FAR. LIRING/3 continued
that to the sole purpose of the trip, he returned
to Mexico City on 21 July in order to await the arrival of "Valentín". Ac-
cording to LIRING/3 this occurred in a rather strange way. When he returned
home he found a note under the door with a brief text stating that someone
had passed by to see him. The note was signed with a five-pointed star
rather crudely drawn in the place of a signature. L/3 stated that he was
completely puzzled at this, but on reflection felt that the five-pointed
star meant 1700 and he therefore went to the safehouse at 1700 that day
to await further contact. According to L/3, a person did telephone him
shortly after he arrived and identified himself as "Valentín". He asked L/3
to await another call at 1030 the following day so that a meeting could be
arranged. L/3 continued that he finally succeeded in meeting with "Valentín"
and brought him to the safehouse on the evening of 25 July. He stated that
he talked with this person until 0400 the following morning.
5. LIRING/3 reported that "Valentín", who identified himself by true name
as Moisés Crozco Leal, Calle Tenfis 88, Apt 5, Zona 21, Country Club, Col.
Churubusco, Mexico City, D.F. Crozco stated to L/3 that he had been in Me-
xico some twenty years and had been engaged in propaganda work for the FAR.
He added that recently he had received instructions to contact L/3 and talk
with him "very frankly" concerning the procurement problem. He explained
to L/3 that FAR had had very disappointing experiences in the past and was
in desperate need of secure and efficient channels for the procurement of
arms and ammunition from the U.S. and Mexico. He stated that FAR had the
cash necessary to purchase the arms and hoped that L/3's commercial
network could handle the procurement and transport. He indicated to L/3
that FAR had checked him out with favorable results both locally and with
the Cubans. In the course of conversation "Valentín" mentioned that Doc-
tora Mercedes Pereira, whom L/3 had met in Havana, was currently in Mexi-
co. "Valentín" stated that it was a very critical time for FAR and that
everyone hoped that something would be resolved in Havana with regard to
concrete aid from the Cubans. He indicated that in the past both the Cubans
and the Soviets had done more talking than producing in both material and
hard cash. In speaking of the cost immediate needs, "Valentín" stated that
FAR needed a doctor urgently to train the revolutionaries in first aid,
and he asked L/3 whether he could recommend a doctor that might be willing
to visit FAR headquarters for about ten days for this purpose. L/3 told
Rowton that he promised to look into the latter soonest, adding that he had
in mind his friend Raúl Moreno Concha, who was a medical student and pro-
bably qualified to give first aid instruction.
6. LIRING/3 continued that he expressed his concern to "Valentín" regarding his
arms procurement effort, but would prefer to be able to talk directly with
FAR leaders to get first-hand information as to their needs, and arrange
secure methods of payment. Then L/3 referred to the delinquent account
(medicine and radio tubes). "Valentín" replied that unfortunately only part
of the medicine had arrived intact, the other part presumably having been
captured by the Guatemalan army. He promised that L/3 would be paid for
the material furnished and apologized for not having the money with him. He
added that he receives some financial assistance from FAR and has to live
as best he can from his own resources. In reply to L/3's query, "Valentín"
stated that he did not personally know "Garcia", since FAR insisted on com-
partmentation, and there had been no need for him to meet "Garcia" in the
past. He then lectured L/3 on security, stating that FAR principal pro-
blem to date had been within the organization itself resulting from laxness
on the part of revolutionaries and outright betrayal by some members. He
added that LIRING/3 had been assigned the battle-name "Rafael" and that
henceforth he should use that name whenever dealing with FAR members.
7. LIRING/3 told Rowton that, in the course of conversation regarding possible
supply channels, he mentioned the possibility of air-drops from small
privately chartered planes, using the Raúl Moreno as a pilot. According to
L/3, "Valentín" showed immediate interest in this, commenting that he was
certain FAR would be most interested. He then stated that he felt L/3 was
an important enough asset to meet directly with César Montes himself and
he promised to look into the possibility of arranging a personal interview.
L/3 replied that he would welcome this opportunity since it would clarify
the entire picture for him and enable him to render the most efficient
service to FAR. "Valentín" promised to have some specific word on this
at their next meeting which he requested for 1500 on 28 July, promising
to come to L/3's home between 1500 and 1700. "Valentín" explained that
although the safehouse appeared to be an excellent meeting place, it was
FAR policy not to use the same apartment or place of meeting more than
once.
8. Rowton met with L/3 again at 1430 on 29 July 1967, at the safehouse.
The second meeting had been scheduled for 1900 on 28 July, but on arrival
at the safehouse, Roxton found a note from L/3 stating that he would not
be able to make the 1900 meeting but would see Rowton at 1430 the following
day. The only explanation in the note for the delay was "cosas muy
importantes han sucedido". When Roxton met with L/3 at
1430, the latter explained that "Valentín" had left a note at his home
saying the meeting would be delayed, and then appeared unannounced when
L/3 was not at home and talked briefly with LIRING/4. L/3 stated that he
alarmed LIRING/4 by stating that he ("Valentín") had a wounded man that
must be taken care of urgently and asked L/4 to pass on the message to L/3
in the hope that L/3 could look into the possibility of locating a good
trusted doctor. "Valentín" promised to come back to the house as soon as
he could. According to L/3, "Valentín" reappeared unannounced at about
1000 on 29 July, and showed L/3 a telegram which he had just received from
Guatemala City. The telegram contained the text "if you are interested
in further details concerning the business, present yourself here", and
was addressed to "Valentín" in his true name and address. L/3 stated that
he could not recall the sender's name or address but he assumed that it
would be an alias in any case.
9. According to L/3, "Valentín" explained to him that the telegram meant
that a meeting with César Montes could be arranged and that L/3 should accordingly
prepare himself for the trip. In reply to L/3's query, "Valen-
tín" stated that this took priority over the operation involving the wounded
comrade, who was expected in Mexico City in about 7-8 days. "Valentín"
then stated that he and L/3 would have to make a trip to Tapachula as soon
as feasible and in order to receive from a FAR contact a sealed envelope
containing the name of the first contact in Guatemala City. He added that
he himself would not know what was in the envelope and would himself proceed
on into Guatemala with the FAR contact who delivered the letter. He
added that L/3 would then have to return to Mexico City and fly into Guate-
mala City under commercial cover, since it would be too dangerous to
proceed on to Guatemala City from Tapachula by air (the effort being
small and all travelers being subject to the curiosity and scrutiny of
the local officials). "Valentín" then stated that L/3 should be able
to pass through the Guatemala City airport without difficulty provided he
kept his eye out for a certain José, an ex-Chief of Police who worked
for the North-American Embassy and had a complete file on all sus-
pect persons who might enter or leave the airport. "Valentín" described
Linares as a man of short stature, thin, grey hair combed in a high pompadour
in front, usually dressed in a double-breasted jacket. "Valentín" added that
Linares was considered the most dangerous man at the airport, although he
is not an official but simply a secret agent of the North Americans.
10. "Valentín" then, according to L/3, stated that the latter should proceed
to the Central de Autobuses so that he could then proceed to Tapachula with
him:
1) Khaki shirt and trousers (pantalón y camisa de lona muy cruesa)
2) Leather combat boots (zapatos de campaña)
3) Browning or other automatic weapon with 3 clips and 50
rounds of ammunition.
4) Detonators with wick or electric fuse
5) Gauze for medical treatment
6) Three pills of the most potent poison available.
"Valentín" explained that the Browning automatic was the best since it
could be converted easily into a machinegun with its clip of 13 cartridges.
The Walther was also good since it could be fitted with a silencer.
"Valentín" also explained that the poison capsules were desirable to be
taken in the event of capture by the army to avoid the possibility of one
confessing under torture. He added that one was for the use of L/3 and
the other two for the comrades who would be his escorts.
11. "Valentín" further explained that L/3 should open the sealed envelope
he had received in Tapachula when he was aboard the plane en route to Gua-
temala City, memorize the name and address and then destroy the paper. He
added quickly that he realized L/3 could open the envelope any time after
he received it in Tapachula, and he was free to do so, but it was hoped
for security reasons that he would open it only after he had left Mexico
City airport. "Valentín" added that he himself had no idea of what name
would appear on the paper, but in any case he was sure that it would be
the name of a person not directly involved in revolutionary activities.
201-798301
12. L/3 was to pay a friendly visit to this person, asking no reference
to politics, but using a prearranged code word in the conversation.
This recognition signal would lead to the first meeting with the comrades
(probably two) who would escort L/3 to César Montes.
13. L/3 stated that he had another meeting with "Valentín" at 2200
that same evening (29 July) at the Café Literario where he hopes to ob-
tain more detail regarding the timing of the trips. L/3 said that he preferred
to make the first trip to Tapachula on 1 August since LIRING/4
was greatly upset over the recent developments and had to be calmed down.
He added that L/4 was very pessimistic over L/3's chances of returning
from such a trip alive and he would have to reassure her that he intended
to take all precautions.
14. Inasmuch as Rowton's careful review of telephone traffic for the period
19-21 July failed to reveal any telephone call from anyone other than L/3
to make the trip to Tapachula, and in fact revealed traffic indicating that
L/3 was in Mexico City during the period 19-21 July, when he claimed
to be in Tapachula, Roxton stated that he did not believe L/3's story re-
garding his initial contact with "Valentín" and his trip to Tapachula. Since
L/3's telephone answering service reported repeated messages from "señor
Juárez" and L/3's true name, he felt he could use this rather than indicate
in any way that L/3's safehouse (whose telephone was tapped) was being
monitored. LIRING/3 became thoroughly upset, as he had done on the previous
occasion when Rowton had impugned his veracity, and assured Roxton with tears
in his eyes that he had always been "fundamentally" honest, although he might
have exaggerated in the matter of details and exact dates. L/3 was so emotionally
disturbed that he felt it unwise to press the matter further at that time and
proposed to Rowton that he (Rowton) meet with LIRING/4 that evening at 2200,
when he would be meeting with "Valentín" again. Roxton turned down L/3's
invitation to be present at the Café Literario so that he could get a look
at "Valentín" himself since Rowton hoped that the meeting would be covered
in any case by the Station team (which had L/3 under surveillance since
the previous afternoon).
15. LIRING/4 came to the safehouse at 2200 and was able to talk pri-
vately with her for about two hours. She arrived in a highly emotional
state, alleging that she was not aware of what was happening and was sure
that L/3 was heading for disaster. She explained that "working capital was
one thing, but risking one's life was another, and that although she agreed
with the principle of the revolution, she could not accept the terrible
consequences of revolutionary activities that had suddenly become a
reality for her. She complained that L/3 kept her in the dark about many
things and that she could not understand his willingness to risk his
life and the happiness of his family "so precipitously". Then Roxton
questioned her discreetly as to L/3's trip to Tapachula, she stated in
uncontrollable sobs (they appeared to Roxton quite genuine) that he
suddenly left the preceding week, saying he was going to Chiapas and dis-
appeared for 3-4 days. She said she was so upset she could not remember
anything but the feeling of abandonment. She then complained that although
Roxton was the only person she could turn to in a crisis like the one she
went through last week, she could not locate him anywhere. She called his
telephone (answering service) repeatedly and then in desperation called
LIRING/7 in the hope that he would know something. She did not know which
"Harris" she was referring to. LIRING/4 then stated that she realized
suddenly that if L/3 were to disappear she would be subject to deportation
to Cuba, a fate which she apparently genuinely dreaded. Roxton assured her
that he would do everything possible to see that she was taken care of in
this eventuality, but she protested that L/3 was the only person she could
hope to find happiness with and Roxton could not bring him back if anything
happened to him.
16. Roxton then stated that before L/3 could take such a trip with serious
risks involved, he would have to study the situation thoroughly. He ex-
plained that at the moment he had serious doubts regarding the contacts
that had brought L/3 to this point. L/4 replied that she herself had seen
the latest contact ("Valentín") only once when he came to the house and
gave her the message regarding the wounded person. When Roxton queried her
again concerning the trip to Tapachula, she stated that L/3 had told her
upon his return that he had asked someone else to make daily calls to Row-
ton's answering service, and upbraided her for calling. (This would ex-
plain what appeared to be L/3's daily calls during the period 19-21 July,
but it would not explain L/3's conversations with Berta Wicisser and Ser-
gio Valdez on 20/7/67 and his remark to Berta Wicisser on 21/7/67 that
he did not go out of town after all.)
17. Rowton felt that, although his meeting with L/4 was not particularly
productive, it served its purpose in advising L/3 indirectly that he did
not accept L/3's story of the trip to Tapachula and his initial contact
with "Valentín".
Wallace B. Roxton
1 August 1967
1. at meeting with Rowton 1700 on 28 July, L/3 reported that Miss
Orozco Leal, who claims to be L/3's new FAR liaison for procurement of
arms, is currently staying in his apartment on Calzada Tacubaya. L/3 ex-
plained to Rowton that at 2200 on 29 July meeting with Crozco, latter stated
that he had instructions from FAR headquarters to escort L/3 to Tapachula
for contact instructions and instructed L/3 procure immediately Browning
or Walter automatic with 3 clips and at least 30 cartridges plus detonators
with wick or electric fuse and three poison tablets of highest possible potency
which he would need on trip from Guatemala City to Montes headquarters. Crozco,
however, insisted that L/3 bring these items with him to Tapachula and offered
that he would make sure they were safely delivered to Guatemala City for eventual
pick-up by L/3.
2. At end of meeting Crozco asked L/3 to put him up for the night at his
home "since it was very late and in any case he