1104-10071-10306 2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
Chief, Washington Field Office
Director, Domestic Contact Service (D/CS)
Rolando Masferrer Jr.
Possible Source Lead
28 June 1972
RETURN TO CLA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
Memorandum for the Record dated 18 June 1972, Same Subj.
Kappas/Masferrer telecon
03
1. In regard to referent telephone conversation of recent
date, we asked Jeffrey G. Peterson (WH/3/Venezuela) for additional
assessment information on Rolando Masferrer, Jr., Vice-President of
Sales, Military Armament Corporation, Headquartered in Georgia.
03
2. Jeffrey Peterson is a young "career trainee" who has been
with the Agency for about six months. He met Masferrer in Miami,
Fla., where both belonged to a Florida National Guard Unit.
03 He
knows Masferrer socially as well having met frequently
for "drinks and beer".
03
3. According to Peterson, based on his observations, subject
is a personable, intelligent, individual who appears trustworthy
and of sound mind and judgment. He is a solid citizen completely
assimilated in the American mainstream; intensely interested in the
U.S. political processes. Politically, he is of moderate conservative
persuasion. He is an astute businessman of demonstrated ability and
integrity. To highlight this point, Petersen mentioned that Masferrer 03
spurned lucrative cash offers for "under the table" deals to engage
in illegal weapons trade in Latin America. He refused these offers
to operate in legitimate business circles.
4. Young Rolando takes a sociable drink; has no known bad
habits. He has a keen eye for attractive females, but no more so
than all healthy males. Peterson said he would not hesitate to 03
recommend subject for a position of trust and confidence.
5. Rolando Masferrer served with the Green Berets, elite
U.S. Army unit whose members require special security clearances by
the military.
03
6. Peterson underlined his previous statement that Rolando
should not be confused with his father, Rolando Arecio Masferrer y
Rojas, a former Cuban Senator who was leader of the notorious "Los
Tigers", the dreaded army of enforcers under Batista.
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
123880
14-00000
SECRET
Division (Cost mol)
SECRET
23880

