14-00000
104-10196-10029
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
The attached presentation was given by
Mr. Norrian Smith of CI/SPG.
SECRET
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS
:
Talk to be given at an OSI Intelligence Collection Seminar to
be held on 22 and 23 February 1971.
Yesterday and today you have held discussions on the intelligence
collection process, targetting, and exploitation. In this hour long dis-
cussion of counterintelligence, I am going to continue that process. I
am going to talk about intelligence collection, the process of targetting,
and the process of exploitation. However, in contrast to the other
speakers in the seminar, I am going to discuss you as a target.
For most of us serving in the Directorate of Science and Tech-
nology or the Directorate of Intelligence, security on a daily basis
consists of showing your badge to the man at the door and making sure.
that your safe is closed at night. During the day we associate with our
colleagues who wear badges to testify to the fact they have been cleared.
Outsiders who come into view also wear badges indicating that they too
have been cleared. Thus wrapped in this cloak provided us by security,
few of us give much thought to the fact that a major power with endless
funds considers the United States and in particular the Central Intelli-
gence Agency to be the "main enemy, the primary adversary, the
prime target." There is documentary proof of this. I can go on to
:
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
say that in this age of technology where, in my view, the United States
has no equal, the Directorate of Science and Technology and its offices
such as the Office of Scientific Intelligence rate pretty high on the
priority list of targets. It has to look at the publicity -- and look
at the fact that as so many of you know, the Soviet technological gap
is something the Soviets are trying to close fast. Interestingly
enough, the KGB S&T effort has expanded in roughly the same time
frame as DDS&T. Before 1956, there were small S&T sections which
were part of geographic area divisions. About 1956/57, these isolated.
scientific units were consolidated into an. S&T department and in 1963,
the department was upgraded into a full fledged directorate. As far
as overseas representation is concerned, the USSR has 41 slots in
IAEA. Twenty percent of these are occupied by KGB S&T case officers.
:
O.K., so you never heard of any Russians snooping around OSI
and besides security is there with badges and locked safes, etc., so
we are protected from attack. Don't you believe it. Let us for a
moment pretend that we are KGB or GRU operations officers and that
we wish to penetrate OSI. How do we go about it? Do we send one of
our nice Soviet lads to call? Do we use a case officer from one of the
Eastern European satellites? Just for an idea of the magnitude of
2
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
:
:
the known resources available to us as KGB officers, consider that
in 1969 there were more than 21,000 Soviet citizens resident in some
77 non-Communist countries. Of these almost six thousand were
official Soviets and sixty percent or 3,560 of these official Soviets
were intelligence officers. Putting this in local terms, there are 100
Soviets officially listed as diplomats at the Embassy here in Washing-
ton. It would be more than prudent to assume that at least 60 of these
people are Soviet intelligence officers. In addition to this formidable
array to which I have just alluded, the seven Eastern European Commu
nist countries have among them nineteen different intelligence services.
Adding to the Washington contingent from these services brings our
number up to about 100 Bloc intelligence officers. Ah, but you say
the FBI watches them. Do they? Consider the statistics. Assuming
a 3 man surveillance team, which is far too few for a good surveillance
operation, 24 hour per day coverage of these people would on the basis
of 3 eight hour shifts require 900 people in the street seven days per
week. With these figures, you are talking about some 20% of the
entire FEI staff of agents just to handle this small piece of the pro-.
blem. Nevertheless, if all we had to worry about were these 100 Bloc
agents in Washington, we could rest easy. At the moment for example,
the FBI is terribly concerned about the proposed new Soviet
3
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
i
Consulate in San Francisco which will turn loose the KCB on the
coast.
1
No, the chances are that the fellow we need to worry about is
a nice friendly American or his liaison counterpart who is in the
building and who is wearing a badge. In other words, a penetration
agent. With the use of that term, let me digress for a moment and
try to lay out for you what counterintelligence is all about.
There are several ways to look at counterintelligence. One
thing that it is not is another name for security, even though there
are security factors involved. Within CIA, we try to defend or protect
three things: our people, our installations, and our activities. Pro-
tecting people and things is the primary job of the Office of Security.
Within the Clandestine Service the third item, protecting our activities,
is a joint responsibility between the various area divisions and the
Counterintelligence Staff. Traditionally speaking, there has not been
a function similar to a Counterintelligence Staff in DDS&T because
traditionally they were not engaging in operational activities which
:
had to be protected. This, as you are aware, is no longer true. Some
of us who have been exposed to both sides of the house are somewhat
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
uneasy that auch highly sensitive scientific and technical information
and operations are not better protected than they are. However, this
la, for my part, a personal cpinion,
1
Under the terms of NSCID No. 5, the CIA and in turn the CI
Staff bas USIB responsibility for counterintelligence abroad. This
means that CI Staff is to provide the lead in developing a central register
of people of counterintelligence interest, developing counterintelligence
doctrine, setting up channels for sharing CI-Information, etc. It does
not mean that we act as policeman for the community. Fach agency is
responsible for policing its own house, and frankly some do a better
job than others. However, there is direct overlapping in the jet age
between CIA's responsibilities and the internal security responsibilities
of the FBI. There is no clear line of demarcation between U.S. Agencies.
All work together..
As an activity, CI work can be considered to be two matching
halfe; security and counterespionage. Security consists of establishing.
passive or static defenses against ali hostile and concealed attempts
to interfer with our intelligence functions regardless of who tries to
interfer and protecting our secrets. Counterespionage on the other
hand requires the identification of a specific adversary, a knowledge
5
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
of what specific operations he is carrying out and the countering or
neutralising of his operations by penetrating or manipulating them so
that their thrust is turned back upon the agressor.
Finally, and this to me is the real guts of Ci as I know it, a
defensive service, such.as a Counterintelligence Staff, cannot simply
sit and build defensive barriers. It must accept a responsibility
beyond the requirements of security if we read security to mean pro-
tection against clandestine or covert attacks on our people, installations,
and activities. If this is all we seek to do, any sophisticated intelligence
service such as the GB or GRU will be too strong for us; and we wil
find ourselves unequal to the task. Cood counterintelligence must be.
aggressive. It must learn all it can about our enernies, learn their
secrets and be privy to their councils. In other words, the one tran-
scending objective of counterintelligence is the penetration of the enemy
intelligence service. A Soviet defector is of much less value than a
clandestine penetration of the Soviets service because with a defector,
the Soviets know precisely what he knew and thus how badly they are
hurt. With a penetration, you have the only means of really knowing
whether you yourself are penetrated.
:
:
Insofar as the organization and activities of a counterintelligence
6
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
staff are coacerned, its structure and fonctions are to a large extent
determined by the activities of its chief adversary and by national ob-
Jectives. La our case this would of coarse be the KGB and GRU.
Basically speaking, inost CI Staffs break down into an operations group
and a research and analysis group, with the usual administrative sup
port including a very strong technical unit. The operations group
carries en such activities as surveillance and countersurveillance,
penetrations, provocations, double ageat operations, technical operations
and countertechnical operations, counterintelligence interrogations and
debriefings, the handling of walk-ins and defectors and joint operations
with various foreign liaison services and operational security reviews.
I will be glad to define and/or expand sa the meaning of any of these.as
you desire. Are there any questions?
A CI operations group with world-wide responsibilities is usually
broken down into geographic areas with an operations branch for each
area. A typical operations branch would have a counterespionage unit,
a countersubversion unit, a counterpropaganda unit, and an operational
security cait.
:
While the operations group and branches are worrying about the
day-to-day problems involved in the handling of operations of the type
?
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
we have just described, the unit is analyzing all of the data oh-
tained, devising doctrine and guidance and putting out reports about
developments and trends as well as specific studies re the enemy in
much the same manner as you write a report in 051, with of course
the big difference that CI reports are intended primarily for Claudiences
and policy purposes so that the circulation is much less than is the case
for an OSI or FMSAC product. The R & A unit looks at the activities
of an individual KGB officer as tactical reporting. Activity of the
Soviet Embassy as a whole is considered to be operational reporting
while operations of the AGE in toto are assessed as strategic reporting.
Since all intelligence organizations handle certain situations in certain
=:
ways and each has its hallmarke which reflect among other things the
:
society which it represente, long-term analysis by the R & A unit is
crucial to establish the standard operating procedures for recognizing
Soviet operations for what they are and then countering them.
Now, back to you as a target. Naturally the KGB would like to
achieve that ultimate success a penetration of CIA. Having an agent
in the enemy intelligence service is a particularly rewarding pastime
because people in intelligence services know so much about what is
going on in their own country that is classified. Many of you, for instance,
8
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
know a great deal about highly classified projects in the Pentagon which
have little or nothing to do with our intelligence collection or analysis.
If you are working the Soviet ABM problem you get to know a great
deal about our own ABм.
:
Many people work long hard hours to try to insure that the KGB
does not succeed in getting a staff employee on their payroll.
Over the past five years attempts by foreign intelligence officero,
principally Soviet, to recruit U.S. Government employees have been
reported at the rate of about two a day. During this period there were
more than 1,000 incidents in which the foreigner felt he had developed
ジ
;-
the employee to the point that he could come right out and make the
recruitment pitch. Most of those targeted were State Department
employees, with the Agency and the Department of Defense tied for
second. This at least shows that the KGB is trying. But perhaps the
most significant thing to think about is this. If this many cases were
reported, how about the recruitment attempts that were not.
:
2
My purpose la reviewing the above is not to make you start
looking crosseyed at your colleagues, but merely to suggest that you
give the matter some thought from time to time.
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
Let's assume that we have been successful in keeping any GB
agents off the payroll. What do they do next? Who else comes into the
CIA Headquarters building? I found out recently, to my great surprise,
that there are 100,000 visitors to this building in a year's time. But
let's get specific, let's talk about OSI.
Between August-1970 and early this month, OSI had 793 visitors..
Of this number, the bulk, or 454, were from other Government agencies,
138 were contractors cleared by CIA, while the remaining 201 were
private individuals who either hold no clearances at all or hold some
kind of clearance from another Government agency.
Unfortunately, CIA is rather unique in spending the slots, money
and manhours in clearing people. As you know, we have our own clear-
ance system and do not rely on the checks of others for our employees or
our contractors. With other agencies, and particularly with the Depart
ment of Defense, with employees and contractors in the millions the kind
of investigative checks we perform in CIA would run to the thousands of
people and the billions of dollars, and in all likelihood the whole defense
effort would grind to a screeching halt if they did.
:
Too often then an individual with a top secret clearance from
another agency is simply an individual whose name, when checked
10
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
against the lists of the various security agencies (National Agency
Check), failed to disclose any so-called derrogatory information. I
can tell you off the record that there are
number of individuals who
worked abroad on classified projects for foreign governments for several
years who then returned to this country and promptly were granted top
secret clearances by U.S. agencies without a word asked..
With this the case it follows that some of these people may well
be working for someone besides Uncle Sam. Along that line, I can also
say off the record that there were among those 793 OSI visitors in the
last six months people who were in fact working for someone besides
Uncle Sam.
Again, the foregoing is not calculated to make you into a suspi-
cious security officer type at all. Hopefully it will get you away from
the state of mind where this sort of thing never occurs to you. In
conclusion I have some specific suggestions to make which are not big
deal but which, if implemented, can be of help to us all.
If you are dealing with people outside the Agency, or inside for
that matter, there is no need to tell them everything you know about
everything just because they are cleared. If they come to talk about
apples, stick to apples. Don't give them a gratis tour of the orchard.
11
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
if one of your contractors or a former colleague in industry
really tries to pump you about things that are none of his concern, shut
him off. if her persists, tell someone.. While he is probably trying to
get more business from us for his firm, there may be more to it than
that.
II CIA Headquarters seeins a glamorous place to your former
colleagues and neighbors, leave it that way. Don't give them a gulded
tour just for the hell of it.
:
Don't assume that just because the guy does not have a Russian
name or speak with an accent that he is 100% OK. The ideal KGB agent
is the W.A.S. P. with a Yale degree and a pedigree that gets him into
the Sons of the American Revolution. Even if your guy is just great, he
may have a boss or colleague back at the ranch who is not so great.
This is something to be kept particularly in mind when dealing with
foreign liaison people. Be particularly wary of the liaison type --
remember Fuchs, Vassal, Philby, and Bossard. And finally, just
because your friend was cleared for top secret whatsis six months ago,
don't automatically assume he still is. Check. He may have been fired
in the interim.
:
Are there any questions?
১
12
SECRET

