1000000
104-10422-10327
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR:
CONFIDENTIAL
Chief, CI Staff
18
SUBJECT
:
Allegations of Lee Harvey OSWALD'S
Connection with the Agency
REFERENCE
:
Memorandum of Conversation, Dan
Rather/Les Midgley and the DCI,
Dated 6 September 1975
1. The referent memorandum contains two points
which require comments. The first point concerns
allegations that were made shortly after the assassination
of President Kennedy and that have crept up every so often
since then. In one form or another, the allegations are
that Lee Harvey OSWALD had been connected with the Agency.
The allegations are totally unfounded.
2. The facts regarding this matter are as follows:
a.. On 27 November 1963 I was instructed by
Mr. R.G.Rocca, my immediate superior at that time, to
make a thorough check within the Agency at Headquarters
to determine whether Lee Harvey OSWALD had ever been
used by the Agency or been connected with it in any
conceivable way. He ordered me to make the checks
directly and personally to the degree possible and not
to accept statements of intermediaries. He also ex-
plained that he was following instructions from Mr. R.
Helms, who was then the DDP and served as one of the
Agency's key contact officials with the Warren
Commission.
b. Although I had already checked the Main Index
of IP (then RID) on the night of the assassination, I
rechecked the Main Index and found no record beyond
that which I had already obtained before (plus those
items which had been integrated into the records system
since the assassination). There was nothing in the DDO
records which indicated any Agency connection with
OSWALD.
copy sent to EA/DDO,
Mr. Perchous, 18 Sept 75.
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
c. The next component I checked was DCD.
There was no record in their Headquarters files.
Arrangements were then made for me to check
telephonically with each DCD base in the US.
chiefs of the bases then serached their records
and spoke with their officers. I was then advised
by each of the chiefs or their designees individ-
ually that there had been no contact with OSWALD.
d. I then checked with Division D, SE Division,
and LA Division's Cuban Operations Group (COG) for
any informal desk records. The results were like-
wise negative.
e. Through the Security Research Section
(SRS) of the Office of Security I had the security
files checked. There was no record of OSWALD.
f. Although CRS keeps no records on Americans,
I checked their Soviet, Mexican, and Cuban holdings
on the remote chance that they may have recorded
something on OSWALD. There was no record in those
files.
g. In my presence the chief of the CI Staff's
Administrative Office called the Office of Personnel
and received the word that there was no record on an
employee or an applicant for employment named Lee
Harvey OSWALD.
h. I also checked the Office of Medical
Services and found no record on OSWALD..
i. The Covert Action Staff also found no record
on him.
j. Finally, I also checked the records of the
CI Staff's Operational Approval Group (CI/OA) with
negative results.
k. My checks were completed on 4 December 1963
and I then sent a brief informal note to Mr. Rocca
2
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
specifying all the checks I had made and stating
that the results showed that Lee Harvey OSWALD
had never had any connection whatsoever with the
Agency. Eventually a statement to this effect
was communicated to the Warren Commission.
3. Similar checks regarding use or employment
of OSWALD had been requested by the foreign divisions
of their appropriate stations, I was told, and the
results were negative.
4.
I recall very clearly that we were extremely
concerned at the time that OSWALD, as an American returning
from the USSR, might have been routinely debriefed by
DCD, thus having established contact with the Agency.
The same point has now, quite understandably, been made
by the two CBS newsmen.
Having some knowledge of this
subject I have personally concluded that there is valid
reason for DCD's lack of interest in OSWALD at that time.
He would surely have been contacted and debriefed by DCD
had he been to the USSR and returned to the US before
1957/1958. Travel to the Soviet Union by Westerners,
particularly by Americans, before that time was quite
uncommon and we were hungry for eyewitness information in
those days. The thaw began in about 1956 and by the end
of that decade there were so many persons travelling to
and from the Soviet Union that DCD was incapable of talk-
ing to all of them. Therefore, a program of selectivity
and specific target applicability was instituted. In
light of the above, it seems to me that OSWALD-- if he
came to DCD's attention at all--would have easily been
by-passed, because he simply did not possess the type of
information that DCD was seeking at that time. DCD would
surely have used its limited manpower on travellers who
had had much greater access in the USSR.
5. It should be added that my above-described
search in the Agency file holding produced no record or
indication that any other US Government agency had used
him as a source or had considered him for recruitment.
3
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
6. The second point in the referent memorandum
concerns the papers that were available at Headquarters
on Oswald before the day of the assassination. Specif-
ically, there were five documents which had been sent to
the Agency before the assassination. Two of the documents
had been sent to us by the FBI, two by the Department of
State, and one by the US Navy. A 201 file (201-289248)
had been opened on 9 December 1960 on the basis of the
receipt of the first of these five documents. The 201
file contained no records that had been originated by
any Agency component. The Mexico City station's reporting
of the monitoring of Oswald's activities in Mexico had not
as yet been included in the 201 file. The pertinent cables
from Mexico City were held at the Mexico branch at Head-
quarters, while the data contained in them had been
disseminated to the FBI upon receipt. The cables were
incorporated into the file following the assassination -
and were, of course, made available to all concerned,
including the Warren Commission.
7. It should be noted that no particularly great
urgency was attached to the handling of the records
regarding Oswald before the assassination because Oswald's
name had no particular meaning before that fateful event.
8. The facts regarding the records we possessed
before the assassination as well as the make up of our
computerized records system were explained to Chief Justice
Warren, members of his Commission, and a group of the
Commission's staff members when they visited Headquarters
in about March 1964 for the express purpose of viewing the
methods and controls we employed in our records keeping
activities.
Our 201 file on Oswald was also shown to them
at the time. From all I have heard regarding this visit,
the visitors were satisfied with our records system and
the manner in which we kept our records...
Saul Hart
Paul Hartman