14-00000
104-10145-10043
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
Journal - Office of Legislative Counsel
Wednesday - 20 October 1976
Page 4
77-0010 J-13
RATS
13. (Unclassified - LLM) LIAISON Ken Brooten, on the
staff of the House Select Committee on Assassination, called requesting
any summary information the Agency might have on the Kennedy
assassination. I told Brooten that I had met with Richard Sprague,
also on the Committee staff, yesterday and Sprague had asked for
the same information and that I was in the process of determining
if it exists. Brooten was unaware that Sprague had requested this
information.
14. (Secret - PLC) BRIEFING Attended a pre-trip briefing of
George Murphy, Executive Director, Joint Atomic Energy Committee,
given by Bob Ames, NE Division, and Jack Petry) Israeli Desk/DDO.
Murphy is accompanying a group of Members from the Committee who will
be visiting Cairo, Israel and Iran. Certain material was requested which
Ames will pull together. See Memorandum for the Record prepared by
Ames and (Petry) 13
15. (Secret - PLC) LIAISON Met with Frank Slatinshek, Chief
Counsel, House Armed Services Committee staff, and gave him a copy each
of the classified and unclassified letters to the Agency from the House
Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control and we discussed the
sensitivity of the information requested. Slatinshek said we should try
to respond without disclosing sensitive operations or sensitive liaison
relationships. He said he would assist if we have problems. I gave him
the letter from the Director expressing appreciation for his appearance
before the Intelligence Process Course. He asked for a rundown of past
members of the PFIAB and any history as to its creation.
16. (Confidential - PLC) LIAISON Met with Claudia Wrazel, in
the office of Senator Alan Cranston (D., Calif.), and discussed the background
of the request from their constituent Kamal Kapur. She said she felt
assured that the Agency had not in any way investigated Kapur and will so
advise him. She will call me if anything further develops.
21287
17. (Confidential - PLC) TRAVEL Met with Frank Sullivan, Senate
Armed Services Committee staff, and clarified an incoming cable from
Chief of Station in Bonn) stating that an advance itinerary from the Air Force
of Senator Sam Nunn's (D., Ga.) upcoming trip included a visit with the
FRG Intelligence Chief. Bonn) noted that there is no such position in the
German government as intelligence chiefs are only within the various services.
Sullivan said this was probably a slip-up by the Air Force here. What is to be
scheduled is an intelligence briefing by the German Ministry of Defense.
Sullivan will straighten the matter out. Sullivan said Senator Nunn will not
have enough time to meet with (COS Bonn). He felt that (Paris) would probably
be the best station to visit. I said I would check and let him know. Mo Sovern,
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY called and will finalize arrangements. SECRET