104-10181-10069
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
TO
Chief, Station, Germany 27, 15-13)
INFO
Richard L. Alverson)
FROM
Chief, LI
DATE
SUBJECT
Operational/CAST
Document Procurement via Camp King
1. The recent defection from Camp King of Sgt. Vladimir SLOBODA has
occasioned a general review of document procurement procedures utilizing
the facilities of Camp King, and suggests that it might be desirable to
examine the matter more closely in the field, where all information is
really at hand, to determine whether such procedures, for reasons of
security, might possibly be altered.

2. Although we readily acknowledge that all pertinent facts are not
available to us at Headquarters, it is our understanding that at the present,
all documentation procured from German officials in Nuremberg, Bad Homburg,
and Giessen, is effected through the intervention of Camp King. In short,
our requests are submitted through the Camp King office, which carries the
requests on to the German offices which actually issue the documents. Not
only do additional numbers of personnel become knowledgeable of such requests,
but a file on all such work for KJARK offices in Germany is maintained in
Camp King, the security of which would appear open to some question.

3. It may well be that for some reason it would be injudicious to
raise the issue of direct liaison with the appropriate German officials
[by KJARK personnel] on such problems; nonetheless, it is our understanding
that the ICC(C) established as the coordinator of all legal/est
German documentation for all services, in which event, direct liaison with
German offices would appear to be authorized by such a designation.

4. We wish merely to raise the problem at this juncture for your
consideration and look forward to the early receipt of your views and
comments.
PERCY K. RATHELOTT
20 September 1960
Distribution:
Orig & 1 - C/S (via Alvarez)
1 - RI
1 - DC/EE/O
1 - EE/C/S
1 - EE/GIS (dummy copy)