1104-10422-10214
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MATERIAL REVIEWED AT CIA HEADQUARTERS BY
HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS STAFF MEMBERS
FILE TITLE/NUMBER/VOLUME: BOOK I- INVESTIGATION OF JFK
ASSASSINATION-PERFORMANCE OF
THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
[BACKGROUND FILE ON "WORKING GROUP STUDY,
INCLUSIVE DATES:
1963 TO UNDATED COMMENTS ON BOOK I,
SSC FINAL REPORT
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION: IG-BRECKINRIDGE
ROOM:
DELETIONS, IF ANY:
DATE
DATE
RECEIVED RETURNED
7.02.28
REVIEWED BY
(PRINT NAME)
CHUCK BERR
SIGNATURE OF
REVIEWING OFFICIAL
Chuck Berh
NO DOCUMENTS MAY BE COPIED OR REMOVED FROM THIS FILE.
13-00000
SECRET
RODUCTION
CITY
Lee Harvey OSWALD first came to the goats attention
upon receipt of AIRGRAM no. 1301, dated 31 October 1959, from the
United States Embassy in Moscow, in which it was stated that
OSWALD had appeared at the Embassy on 31 October to renounce his™
American citizenship. He stated that he had applèed in Moscow
for Soviet citizenship after his arrival in the Soviet Union on
15 October. The first public reference to OSWALD appeared in the
Washington Post of 1 November 1959.
On 2 November 1959, the FBI liaison officer requested a
trace be run on Lee Harvey OSWALD in the CIA's central hold-
ings. The response on 4 November was negative.
Because of the counterintelligence implications of
OSWALD's action, the Counter Intelligence Staff opened an offi-
cial file on Lee Harvey OSWALD to accommodate biographic infor-
mation developed by the Agency in response to a Department of
State inquiry, dated 25 October 1960, on a list of American de-
fectors in Soviet Bloc countries. OSWALD's name was one of those
appearing on the list. CIA forwarded an interim reply on 3
November 1960; a final reply on 21 November 1960. Until early
October 1963, the contents of the OSWALD file held by CIA consis-
ted entirely of press clippings and reports disseminated by the
Department of State, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the
Department of the Navy.
On October 1963, the CIA Station in Mexico City received
information from a reliable sou to the effect that "an Ameri--
can named Lee OSWALD had contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico
City on Tuesday, 1 October 1963. He had spoken in halting Russ
sian to the Soviet Embassy guard, Ivan Ivanovich OBYEDKOV, to
whom he said he had visited the Embassy two days earlier, on
Saturday, 28 September. He asked whether there had been a reply
to a telegram that the Consulm with whom he had spoken, but whose
name he could not recall, had promised to send to Washington.
13-00000
2
OBYEDKOV had attempted to establish the identity of the Consul
with whom OSWALD had talked: if it had been a dark person, thens
it had probably been (Valeriy Vladimirovich] KOSTIKOV. OBYEDKOV
after checking with Soviet consular personnel, assured OSWALD the
telegram had been sent to Washington but no answer had been re-
ceived.
[MEXI-6453 (IN
received in Headquarters on 9 October.
36017), 9 October 1963.1 A file check on 10 October by Agency
personnel in Washington revealed the possibility that the Lee
OSWALD who had spoken with OBYEDKOV, and presumably with KOSTIKOV
and Lee Harvey OSWALD, the defector, were the same person.
On 10 October 1963, CIA Headquarters disseminated by cable
[DIR 74673, 10 October 1963] the report in substantially the form
and detail given above to government agencies whose jurisdictional
interests had been established by a review of OSWALD's file: the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of State, the De
partment of the Navy, and the Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice. A comment was included in theereport noting the liklihood
that Lee OSWALD was probably identical with the former marine who-
had defected to the Soviet Union in 1959. [Comment: For some un
explained reason, OSWALD's statement that he had been to the Soviet
Embassy two days before on 28 September 1963 had not been included
in the dissemination.]
On the same day, 10 October 1963, CIA Headquarters sent to the
Mexico City Station a lengthy cable summary [DIR 74830, 10 October,
1963] of the background information held in the Headquarters
on OSWALD. The Mexico City Station was instructed to pass the sub-
stance of its 9 October report to the local representatives of the
same U.S. Government agencies and departments that had been the
information in Washington.
13-00000
2
OBYEDKOV had attempted to establish the identity of the Consul
with whom OSWALD had talked: if it had been a dark person, then
it had probably been (Valeriy Vladimirovich) KOSTIKOν. OBYEDKOV
after checking with Soviet consular personnel, assured OSWALD the
telegram had been sent to Washington but no answer had been re-
ceived
this information
[MEXI-6453 (IN
received in Headquarters on 9 October.
36017), 9 October 1963.1 A file check on 10 October by Agency
personnel in Washington revealed the possibility that the Lee
OSWALD who had spoken with OBYEDKOV, and presumably with KOSTIKOV
and Lee Harvey OSWALD, the defector, were the same person
On 10 October 1963, CIA Headquarters disseminated by cable
[EDIR 74673, 10 October 1963] the report in substantially the form
and detail given above to government agencies whose jurisdictional
interests had been established by a review of OSWALD'S file: the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of State, the De-
partment of the Nary, and the Immigration and Naturalization Ser-
vice. A comment was included in theereport noting the liklihood
that Lee OSWALD was probably identical with the former marine who-
had defected to the Soviet Union in 1959. [Comment: For some un-
explained reason, OSWALD'S statement that he had been to the Soviet
Embassy two days before on 28 September 1963 had not been included
in the dissemination.]
On the same day, 10 October 1963, CIA Headquarters sent to the
Mexico City Station a- lengthy cable summary [DIR 74830, 10 October
1963] of the background information held in the Headquarters' file
on OSWALD. The Mexico City Station was instructed to pass the sub-
stance of its 9 October report to the local representatives of the
same U.S. Government agencies and departments that had been the
information in Washington.
13-00000
President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.]
Between 10 October and 22 November 1963 there app
to
requests/from recipients of the 10 October dissemination
for further information or follow-up investigation
On 22 November 1963, after the news of the assassination had
reached Mexico City, the Station initiated a review of all voice
and
intercept
photographie coverage of both the Soviet and
Cuban Embassies.
This review of voice intercept transcripts con-
ducted by the monitor and other Station personnel turned up other
on 27 and 28 September and
conversations
on 1 October 1963 These transcripts were reported to Headquarters
on 23 November 1963. (MEXI-7023 (IN 67108), MEXI-7025 (IN 67188)
and MEXI-7033 (IN 67232).]
From this review by the Station it became evident that OSWALD
had also visited the Cuban Consulate in Mexico City and had talked
there with a clerk, a Mexican national, named Silvia DURAN. After
the assassination and the publicity about Lee OSWALD, Silvia DURAN
had told a number of relatives and friends that she had talked to
OSWALD about a Cuban visa. Silvia DURAN and her husband, Horacio
DURAN Navarro, were detained and questioned by the Mexican police
from 23 to 25 November-1963.
After giving some of the details of her own personal back-
ground- she was an admitted leftist sympathizer and had formerly
worked for the Mexican-Cuban Institute of Cultural Relations - Sil-
via DURAN said that when she first heard of the death of President
Kennedy she had been depressed and thought_the assassin must have
been a maniac. When she learned he was associated with the "Fair
Play for Cuba Committee" she did not believe it.
When she learned the name of the assassin was Lee OSWALD
she remembered he was the man who had come to the Consulate about
two months before to get a visa to pass through Cuba on his way to
the Soviet Union She realized that he had said he was married to
a Russian and that he had belonged to the "Fair Play for Cuba"
group She checked her file on him in the Consular Archives and
13-00000
from the description of OSWALD, she was sure it was the same man.
OSWALD was denied a Cuban transit visa because he did not yet have
a Soviet visa, and he was told to get the Soviet visa first, but it
was noted that this would require about four months. She had asked
the Cuban Consul himself, Eusebio AZCUE, to talk to OSWALD and they
had an argument when AZCUE urged OSWALD to leave Mexico instead of
waiting there. The Consul had phoned the Soviet Consulate and
talked to the person handling OSWALD'S visa request, who had said
it would take about four months to hear from Moscow about the Soviet
visa The same afternoon, OSWALD had come back again and she he
told him the same thing She gave OSWALD a slip of paper with
name and telephone number on it in case he ever got his Soviet visa
He did not call back, she said.
Silvia DURAN was reinterrogated by the Mexican police
from 27 to 29 November but she did not change or add materially to
her story about OSWALD..
It is known that the Cuban Ambassador in Mexico, Joaquim
HERNANDEZ Armas, reported on the detainment and interrogation of
Silvia DURAN by the Mexican authorities. The Cuban Government also
sent the Mexican Government a stiff note of protest, which the Mexi-
can Government rejected.
On 26 November, the day after DURAN's release, Cuban Pre-
sident DORTICOS queried HERNANDEZ about his report HERNANDEZ con-
firmed that there had been an altercation between OSWALD and Consul
AZCUE DORTICOS made a persistent but unsuccessful effort to de-
termine from HERNANDEZ whether the Mexican authorities had threate-
ned Silvia DURAN so that she would make a statement that the Con-
sulate "had given money to that American". HERNANDEZ's response
was that nothing of that sort had happened. [MEXI-7068 (IN
26 November 1963; HMΜΜΑ-22545, 29 November 1963)
The CIA follow-up investigation produced the following
confirmed results which have a bearing on Silvia DURAN's account:
27 September. In mid-afternoon, Silvia DURAN infor-
a.
13-00000
med the Soviet Embassy that a male American citizen had
requested a visa to transit Cuba on his way to the Soviet
Union. She desired to know with whom the American had
spoke at the Soviet Consulate. Also she indicated that
13-00000
the Cuban Consulate could grant him a visa and arrange
immigration details if the concession of a Soviet visa were
assured.
b. 27 September. Pursuant to her inquiry, Silvia DURAN
received a confirmation from the Soviet Embassy that the
American had been to the USSR installation. He had shown
them a letter from the Soviet Consulate in Washington indi-
cating that he had been long awaiting a visa for himself
and his wife to go to the USSR. No answer had come from
Washington; however, the waiting period was sometimes four
or five months. The American also had a letter attesting
that he was a member of a pro-Cuban organization but he had
claimed that the Cubans would not give him a visa unless he
had already received a Russian visa.
Although the American was still at the Cuban Consulate
Silvia DURAN repeated that she could not give himaa transit
visa unless a Soviet visa was forthcoming, notwithstanding
the American's wish to go to Cuba to wait there for his
Soviet visa. According to DURAN, the American knew no one
in Cuba and she intended to make an appropriate annotation
on the American's card. The Soviet official echoed her
statement that the American was not known.
c. 28 September. Silvia DURAN was again visited at
the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City by the American seeking a
Cuban transit visa. Mrs. DURAN contacted at least two mem-
bers of the Soviet Embassy and facilitated a direct con-
versation between one of the Soviets and the American.
Speaking in poor Russian, the American stated that he alread-
ready had been to the Soviet Consulate and had left an ad-
dress. The Soviet official replied that he was aware of
that. The American suggested that he had not known his
address then, and he had gone to the Cuban Embassy to ask
for the address, because they had it. The American then
13-00000
acceded to the Soviet official's invitation to come by
and give them the address.
d. 1 October. In mid-morning an unidentified individual
speaking broken Russian, contacted the Soviet Military
Attache in Mexico City. He said he had been to the Em-
bassy the previous Saturday (28 September) and had talked
with a Consul who had said they would send a telegram to
Washington: had there been a reply? He was referred to
the Consulate for the information.
These additional materials were promptly disseminated in Washing-
ton by the CIA to the White House, the Department of State, and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (Out Teletype no. 84915, dated
23 November 1963; CSCI-3/778,826, dated 23 November 1963.]
It is believed that the Soviet official with whom OSWALD
dealt in Mexico City was Consular Attache Valeriy Vladimirovich
KOSTIKOV, born on Moscow, 17 March 1933. In his letter of 9 Novem-
ber 1963 to the Soviet Consulate in Washington, OSWALD wrote about
"his "meetings with Comrade KOSTIN [sic] of the Soviet Union in Mexi-
co City, Mexico". There is no official of the Soviet Embassy in
Mexico City with a name resembling "KOSTIN", other than Consul
KOSTIKOV
KOSTIKOV was the senior officer of five Soviet Consular
representatives who dealt with visas and related matters. There
was firm evidence for the conclusion that KOSTIKOV was a Soviet
State Security (KGB) officer, and the other four Consular officers
were also known or strongly suspected of being Soviet State Security
personnel serving under official cover.
KOSTIKOV was believed to be a member-of-Department Thir-
teen of the First Chief Directorate of the KGB Department Thir-
teen is responsible for executive_action, including sabotage and
assassination Its headquarters, according to a very reliable in-
formation conducts interviews or, as appropriate, file reviews on
every foreign military defector to the USSR to study and to deter-
13-00000
mine the possibility of utilizing the defector in his country of
origin.
[Comments: OSWALD's contact with a known KGB officer, particularly
an officer of the 13th Department, was an indication to the CIA
possibly
merely
for more sinister reasons than to
obtain travel documents allowing him to pass through Cuba on his
way to the Soviet Union.
Therefore, CIA
devoted a
great deal of time and effort in trying to make a determination as
to whether OSWALD, as the assassin of President Kennedy, might have
been acting in the capaiety of a witting agent of a foreign power.
The extensi
review and study of all available material
provided no
tion of the KGB
that OSWALD had been acting under direc-
The Agency also examined all available information in an
attempt to determine the exact nature of his contacts with the Cu-
ban Consulate in Mexico City. The Agency was equally unsuccessful
in uncovering any evidence that OSWALD's contacts with personnel
of the Cuban Consulate had any other motive than to obtain a tran-
sit visa for Cuba
OSWALD's reasons for traveling to the Soviet Union have
never been satisfactorily determined.]
13-00000
Comment on
"The evidence indicates that Lee Harvey
OSWALD was in Mexico City from 27 September
1963 through 2 October 1963. On October 10,
1963, Bureau Headquarters was provided with
a copy of a CIA cable which stated that 'Lee
Henry OSWALD' [sic] had been in contact with
the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City on Septem-
ber 28, 1963. 36
Footnote no. 36: CIA cable from Mexico Station
to FBI Headquarters 10/10/63, memorandum from
LEGAT, Mexico City to FBI headquarters, 10/18/63...
All the information that the FBI had prior
to November 22, 1963, on OSWALD's activities in
Mexico City came from the CIA. On October 3,
1963, the CIA Mexico Station reported to Head-
quarters that OSWALD had been in contact with t
the Soviet Embassy. On October 10, 1963, CIA
passed this information with some background
material to the Navy, the State Department, and
the FBI. The Mexico Station made a similar
distribution to FBI and State Department offi-
cials in Mexico. Since OSWALD was an American
citizen, and since FBI was the responsible
agency, disseminating this information ended
CIA's responsibility in this matter.
[V.92]
Errors in above quote from Book V:
The CIA dissemination of 10 October 1963
[DIR 74673] to the FBI, Navy, and State, made no mention
of OSWALD's contact with the Soviet Embassy on 28 September
1963. Although this information had been reported to Head-
quarters by MEXI 6453 (IN 36017), 9 October 1963, the action
desk neglected to include in its dissemination that in addi-
tion to OSWALD's telephone call to the Soviet Embassy on
1 October, OSWALD had mentioned that he had visited the
Soviet Embassy on 28 September 1963.
b. On 8 October 1963, not 3 October, the CIA
Mexico Station reported to Headquarters that OSWALD had
been in contact with the Soviet Embassy. The cable was
received in Headquarters on 9 October 1963.
The Mexico Station made a similar distri-
bution to FBI and State officials in Mexico on 16 October
1963. This memorandum addressed to the Ambassador with
copies to The Minister, the Counselor for Political Af-
fairs, the Regional Security Officer, the Legal Attache,
the Naval Attache, and the I&NS representative included
13-00000
the statement that "This office determined that OSWALD had been
at the Soviet Embassy on 28 September 1963 and had talked with
Valeriy Vladimirovich KOSTIKOV, a member of the Consular Sec-
tion, in order to learn if the Soviet Embassy had received a
reply from Washington concerning his request."
13-00000
Coment:
"96 It is also instructive to note
that CIA Director John McCONE telephoned
FBI Director HOOVER on the morning of No-
vember 26, 1963, and after noting that the
President wanted to make sure the CIA was
giving the FBI full support, specifically
offered to make 'CIA's operational resources
in Mexico' available to the Bureau.
The Committee has seen no evidence that
the FBI asked the CIA to conduct an investi-
gation or gather information on the assasst-
nation case, but middle-level CIA personnel
did routinely provide the Bureau with infor-
mation that came to their attention in the
assassination casell
(Footnote-96, pago 39,V]
Herewith an incomplete list of requests from the FBI
for assistance and information from the CIA. The list speaks
for itself.
26 November 1963
Subject: Richard Thomas GIBSON
(Paraphrase) During the afternoon of 26
November INANITION/17 passed to the FBI
representative in Bern a report (quoted
in full in the cable) The FBI represen-
tative immediately notified ELMARD (P)
and after discussing the content of the
report it was agreed that ELMARD would
contact INANITION soonest. ELMARD em-
phasized the utmost importance the US
Government attached to follow-up of this
matter. ELMARD received prompt answers
to initial questions and arranged to meet
with INANITION/20, INANITION/6 in company
with the FBI representative in Bern..
[BERN-2492 (IN 68312), 26 November 1963
1
28 November 1963
Subject: Rumored $5,000 bank deposit-
made by OSWALD upon return from Mexico
on 3 October 1963.
The FBI has just levied on us an official
request for full information on source
and origin of rumor about five thousand
dollars bank deposit.
[DIR 85654, 28 November 1963]
13-00000
28 November 1963
Subject: Interrogation of Gilberto ALVARADO.
The FBI liaison officer (S. PAPICH) offi-
cially advises that the FBI requests CIA
turn ALVARADO over to Mexican authorities
and that CIA request the Mexican authori-
ties to interrogate ALVARADO in detail.
FBI reports that it understands that the
Mexican authorities have a capability of
polygraphing and requests that CIA re-
quest Mexican authorities that he be poly-
graphed.
The FBI expressed a desire to have the re-
sults of the interrogation as soon as possi-
ble and that the Legal Attache be kept advised
of developments.
[DIR 85663, 28 November 1963]
29 November 1963
Subject: Ricardo SANTOS
MT PAPICH referred me to DIR 85665, 28 November
1963. He referred to the fact that there is a
report that the Third Secretary of the Cuban
Embassy in The Hague, Ricardo SANTOS, has a pro-
CASTRO brother in the United States. He stated
that he would appreciate our checking our files
or taking such other steps as may be indicated
to provide the Bureau with the identity of the
brother said to be in the U. S
(Memorandum from CI/SIG to Chief, WH/3, 29
November 1963.1
9 December 1963
Subject: - Chinese Communist and CASTRO Plot
At-0900 on 9 December 1963 Mr. PAPICH of the
FBI called and advised that the Bureau had a
communication from their Miami field office
setting forth information which had been re-
ceived in a memorandum from our office in
Miami concerning a report which had been re-
ceived from a Western diplomat alleging that
the assassination of President Kennedy was the
result of a plot prepared and executed jointly
by the Chinese communists and CASTRO through
intermediaries..
Mr. PAPICH stated that the Bureau would like
to evaulate this information if possible
He said the Bureau was very much interested in
identifying the source and it would appreciate
any information we can give on where and how
this diplomat got this information since it
would help the Bureau to evaluate this informa-
tion. He said that the Bureau would find the
13-00000
identity of the source and possible access
to the source, if in this country, most
helpful
[Memorandum for the Record, dated 9 December
1963; Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.)
18 December 1963
Subject:
Nomenclature of Weapon possibly
owned by Lee Harvey OSWALD.
On 18 December 1963 a representative of your
Bureau requested clarifying information about
certain Soviet nomenclature believed to refer
tea firearm once possessed in the Soviet Union
by Lee OSWALD..
We were asked to determine what kind of weapon
this might be
TCS CT-3/779225 to the FBI, dated 19 December
1963; Subject
Nomenclature of Weapon possibly
Omed bykee Harvey OSWALD.
7-January 1964
Subject: JackaLRUBY
Mr. Carlos VILLA, Miami, Florida, furnished to
the FBI on December 21, 1963, a letter which
had been forwarded to a friend of his named
Jose Antonio Juan. Mr. Juan had received the
letter from his son living in Cuba.
In the letter the statement was made, "it is
known here that RUBINSTEIN was here a little
less than a year ago visiting a Mr. PRANSKI
owner of a shop dealing in tourist articles
located on Prado Street between Animas and
Trocadero, opposite the Sevilla Biltmore."
It is requested that, through available sources
of your Agency, you develop any information
possible relating to the above quoted statement
in an effort to resolve the allegation that
Jack L. RUBY has possibly visited Cuba since
1959 and has connections there.
[FB Memorandum to the DDP, dated 7 January
1964; Subject: Jack L. RUBY
9 January 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD
Attached is a copy of a memorandum from the
Federal Bureau of_Investigation on Lee Harvey
OSWALD dated 31 December-1963 and an enclosure
to the memorandum containing names and addresses
found in OSWALD's address book and other papers
at the time of his arrest in Dallas, Texas. It
will be noted that the Bureau has asked us to
13-00000
determine whether any of the listed names,
addresses or telephone numbers have in the
past been connected with the Soviet intelli-
gence services
[Memorandum for Chief, OS/SRS, dated 9 January
1963; Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.]
14 January 1964
Our Chief of Station in Mexico dispatched cable [MEXI-
(IN 98273)], advising of a request on the part of the Legal
Attache for the development of information concerning one Daniel
SOLIS' knowledge of ROJAS, whose name appears to be Ylario ROJAS
Villanueva, a 31-year old Mexican citizen residing in Guadalajara,
and information concerning the names of Cubans appearing in an
alleged notebook.said to be in the possession of SOLIS, and an
alleged official or the American Government said to have been in
contact with OSWALD in Cozumel, named Albert LNU
Memorandum for the Record cd, dated 15 January 1964; Subject: Lee
Harvey OSWALD.
7 February 1964
Subject: Eladio ROJAS Villanueva.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer that the
COS tell Luis ECHEVARRIA, acting minister of gobernacio, name of
subject and that with ROJAS agreement plan to give him a polygraph
and promise ECHEVARRIA a brief statement of the resukts of the test.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer have the
polygraph given in Mexico City; he could, if CIA strongly prefers
get their headquarters' and subject's agreement to go to Texas
[MEXI-8117 (IN 15081), 7 February 1964]
12 February 1964
Legal Attache (in Mexico City) requests the following
additional questions be put to Daniel SOLIS:
a. Verify if SOLIS has received two letters
recently from Eladio ROJAS Villanueva aka Eladio
VILLANUEVA regarding notebook.
13-00000
b. Ask SOLIS to forward notebook if found to
Mr. Edwin O. JOHNSON, Consulado Americano, Guaga-
lajara, Jalisco.
Letters in possession of VILLANUEVA indi-
cate he was in Cozumel with Daniel SOLIS for
at least three months in 1963. Can SOLIS re-
call dates?
d. Ask SOLIS if VILLANUEVA was in contact with
Cubans or Americans while in Cozumel
how VILLANUEVA occupied his time.
[MEXI-8194 (IN 18129), 12 February 1964.]
25 February 1964
Subject: Jack L. RUBY.
Ask him
It would be appreciated if you could promptly
advise of any information available to you to
tend to verify this travel by RUBY
[Memorandum to Mr. Winston M. SCOTT, dated 25 February 1964-
from Clark D. ANDERSON, Legal Attache (Mexico City); Subject:
Jack L. RUBY
13 April 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD'S Access to Classified
Information about the U-2
Reference is made to your letter, dated 13
April 1964, captioned Lee Harvey OSWALD, In-
ternal Security Russia Cuba, and to the
attachment which contained statements made
by one Eugene J. HOBBS, HMC, USN. Your letter
requested-certain information regarding sub-
ject's Marine-assignment-at-the Naval Air
Station, Atsugi, Japan, in 1957-and--1958.
[Memorandum for Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation
dated 13 May 1964, from CIA.J
13-00000
determine whether any of the listed names,
addresses or telephone numbers have in the
past been connected with the Soviet intelli-
gence services
[Memorandum for Chief, OS/SRS, dated 9 January
1963; Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.]
14 January 1964
Our Chief of Station in Mexico dispatched cable [MEXI-
(IN 98273)], advising of a request on the part of the Legal
Attache for the development of information concerning one Daniel
SOLIS' knowledge of ROJAS, whose name appears to be Ylario ROJAS
Villanueva, a 31-year old Mexican citizen residing in Guadalajara,
and information concerning the names of Cubans appearing in an
alleged notebook.said to be in the possession of SOLIS, and an
alleged official or the American Government said to have been in
contact with OSWALD in Cozumel, named Albert LNU
Memorandum for the Record cd, dated 15 January 1964; Subject: Lee
Harvey OSWALD.
7 February 1964
Subject: Eladio ROJAS Villanueva.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer that the
COS tell Luis ECHEVARRIA, acting minister of gobernacio, name of
subject and that with ROJAS agreement plan to give him a polygraph
and promise ECHEVARRIA a brief statement of the resukts of the test.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer have the
polygraph given in Mexico City; he could, if CIA strongly prefers
get their headquarters' and subject's agreement to go to Texas
[MEXI-8117 (IN 15081), 7 February 1964]
12 February 1964
Legal Attache (in Mexico City) requests the following
additional questions be put to Daniel SOLIS:
a. Verify if SOLIS has received two letters
recently from Eladio ROJAS Villanueva aka Eladio
VILLANUEVA regarding notebook.
13-00000
President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.]
Between 10 October and 22 November 1963 there app
to
requests/from recipients of the 10 October dissemination
for further information or follow-up investigation
On 22 November 1963, after the news of the assassination had
reached Mexico City, the Station initiated a review of all voice
and
intercept
photographie coverage of both the Soviet and
Cuban Embassies.
This review of voice intercept transcripts con-
ducted by the monitor and other Station personnel turned up other
on 27 and 28 September and
conversations
on 1 October 1963 These transcripts were reported to Headquarters
on 23 November 1963. (MEXI-7023 (IN 67108), MEXI-7025 (IN 67188)
and MEXI-7033 (IN 67232).]
From this review by the Station it became evident that OSWALD
had also visited the Cuban Consulate in Mexico City and had talked
there with a clerk, a Mexican national, named Silvia DURAN. After
the assassination and the publicity about Lee OSWALD, Silvia DURAN
had told a number of relatives and friends that she had talked to
OSWALD about a Cuban visa. Silvia DURAN and her husband, Horacio
DURAN Navarro, were detained and questioned by the Mexican police
from 23 to 25 November-1963.
After giving some of the details of her own personal back-
ground- she was an admitted leftist sympathizer and had formerly
worked for the Mexican-Cuban Institute of Cultural Relations - Sil-
via DURAN said that when she first heard of the death of President
Kennedy she had been depressed and thought_the assassin must have
been a maniac. When she learned he was associated with the "Fair
Play for Cuba Committee" she did not believe it.
When she learned the name of the assassin was Lee OSWALD
she remembered he was the man who had come to the Consulate about
two months before to get a visa to pass through Cuba on his way to
the Soviet Union She realized that he had said he was married to
a Russian and that he had belonged to the "Fair Play for Cuba"
group She checked her file on him in the Consular Archives and
13-00000
(4) Identify and describe the records with regard to this
activity.
The material relating to Lee Harvey OSWALD (internal
Agency documents, reports to and from other government agencies
and departments, correspondence with the Warren Commission, etc.)
is held in the Agency's official file on OSWALD. The official
file no. 201-289248 is held by the CI Staff and comprises 57
volumes, i.e., well over 200 separate file folders and envelopes.
In addition to the official file, there are ancillary files
covering various aspects of the investigation and later develop-
ments - FOIA requests for information, documents (copies) cleared
for release in response to such requests, the Rockefeller Com-