14-00000
104-10170-10058
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
4 September 1962
MEMORANDUM: Chief, Task Force W
SUBJECT: British Press Speculation that DRE Raiders may
have used British Territory as a Base
REFERENCE : DIR 32616 (OUT 70518)
This memorandum is for your information only, and
does not recommend action. Bits and pieces of infor-
mation have suddenly and recently appeared concerning
Cuban exile activity in the Bahamas, and of equally
sudden and recent probes by non-Cuban Bahamian resi-
dents, which may or may not mean something. I also
continue to be somewhat puzzled, as mentioned below,
by the unusual attitude of Chief, Special Branch,
Bahamian Police, with regard to the Anguila Island query.
24
08
1. In response to a recent request from the London Station for
guidance in the event it is queried by_liaison concerning the DRE raid on
Cuba, mainly resulting from British press speculation that the raiders may
have used a secret base in the Bahamas, the Station was informed that the
DRE, in a press conference of 25 August, said that the boats had sailed from
Marathon in the Florida keys, and that British territory apparently was not
involved. Also that the raid was launched without our knowledge or support.
Mr. Gregg 06,08
2. In addition, on 27 August 1962, the FBI informed Mr. Wallen that
it had received an inquiry by way of its Miami field office from Mr.
Bentley,_new_head of Special_Branch in the_Bahamas concerning his recent
investigation of a number of Cuban exiles on the island of Anguila who allegedly
told him they were there on a CIA mission. Mr. Bentley claimed to be concerned 06
because he would of course have to report the matter through the Colonial 24
Office but would very much dislike having to do this if it was actually a CIA
operation. Mr. Wallen suggested that the Bureau might inform Mr. (Bentley] 06
that the activity was definitely not Agency sponsored, but that we might get
in touch with him at some point through MI-5 on this and similar problems. 29
C/TFW, in being informed of this report, stated that he also had recently re-
ceived the same query from the local MI-6 representative in Washington, D. C., 24.
and had also denied any Agency involvement. The above was brought to London
Station's attention with the comment that because of coincidence and logical
placement Anguila conceivably could have been used by the raiders as a staging
area and base.
SECRET
19-124-26
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
81BR
SECRET
Page 2
3. It has since come to our attention that maritime operation PARROT
mounted by WAVE on 22 August involved a scheduled rendezvous on Anguila
key between a WAVE asset and two UR internal officials. The operation
was unsuccessful in that the two UR officials failed to make the rendezvous
as scheduled, WAVE is now planning to rerun the operation on 30/31 August.
4. The above is being brought to your attention since our knowledge
of the use of Anguila as a rendezvous point may possibly cause some future
embarrassment if the British should learn of it and mistakenly associate
it with the activities of the exile group investigated by Mr. Bentley
06
5. Another development, at least peripherally involving the Bahamas,
is described below:
a. The U. S. Coast Guard on 21 August 1962 inquired as
to any interest we might have in one W. Carney, who, in turn,
Is interested in obtaining rights on the Island of Navassa.
Navassa was described as lying thirty miles due west of the
westernmost tip of Haiti, and is under Coast Guard adminis-
tration. According to TFW/PM we have looked into the island
and found it uninhabited---and possibly uninhabitable---with
no water or harbor facilities. CI/Liaison, at our instruction,
has informed the Coast Guard that we are not sponsoring Carney,
but probably had no objection, and would like more details.
b. Carney describes himself as a retired marine engineer,
who owns property in the Bahamas, and who takes out private
fishing parties. He wants to use Navassa as a private fishing
resort, a refueling station, and a watering point. The Coast
Guard has apparently reminded him that there is no water and
no harborage on Navassa, but he is still interested,
c. The Coast Guard has an unmanned radio station on the
island. For some legal reasons they cannot sell, or even lease,
property on the island, but they could give Carney a five year
revocable permit, maintaining the right to inspect and approve
any construction.
SECRET
ZIBR
SECRET
Page 3
d. The Coast Guard is continuing to check into Carney, and
will probably give him the permission he is seeking if they find
nothing derogatory on him. Although Carney is a permanent
resident of the Bahamas, he also has a New York address which
was given as 655 Pelham Parkway, North, Bronx 67, New York.
6. In addition, an Agency contact, a resident of the Bahamas, who
travels extensively throughout the islands, recently reported that he had
personally observed during a trip through the southern keys that several
of the keys which previously were uninhabited were now occupied by a
number of Cuban exiles. According to source, the British authorities) {{
apparently are puzzled as to their presence there and as to what to do
about it.
い
7. Much of the above indicates that a number of Cuban exiles are
showing up in remote areas of the Bahamas, and the British are no doubt
concerned over their presence and possible CIA involvement. Mr. Bentley's
query concerning the group of exiles he allegedly investigated on Anguila 06
Island emphasizes British concern It also sounds somewhat provocative
Ob in that Mr. Bentley claims to have thought it prudent, after having been
told by an unnamed Cuban exile leader that they were there on a CIA mission,
to double check with us before submitting an official report to his own
Headquarters 24
SECRET
VICTOR WALLEN
C/TFW/CI
BIBR

