14-00000
104-10226-10000
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
1 April 1964.
MEMORANDUM FOR RECORD.
SUBJECT:
Discussion with State Department
Officials on the Nosenko Case
1. Mr. Helms and Mr. Murphy met with Ambassador
Thompson, Mr. Thomas Hughes, Mr. Richard Davis and
Mr. Jom Guthrie at the Department to convey to them
our conclusions just arrived at that Nosenko is not
a genuine defector but more probably an agent planted
on us by the KGB. Mr. Helms described the basis for
our belief and the means of arriving at it. Mr. Helms
noted that we had discussed the Nosenko case with the
Warren Commission because they had received a report
from the FBI based on the FBI's interrogation of Nosenko
which pertained to the Oswald case. The report made a
strong case for the position that the Soviet Government
had nothing whatsoever to do with Oswald's assassination
of President Kennedy. The Commission was anxious to know
our reaction and we informed them we were not sure of the
man's bona fides and therefore could not underwrite the
statements he had made.
2. Ambassador Thompson remarked that he had just
heard from Isaac Don Levine and that the latter intended
to write a book on the Oswald case in which he hoped to
make the point that Oswald was mentally unbalanced and
was trying to break up the Kennedy-Khrushchev. relation-
ship.
3. We also related the Krotkov case in the United
Kingdom to the Nosenko case, explaining the way in which
the Soviets could hope, through accusations that former
Ambassador to Moscow Maurice DeJean was an agent, to
"cover" the numerous leaks of sensitive information
suffered by the French Government and reported to us by
the defector Golitsyn.
4.
We then described for State Department officials
the mamer in which Gribanov operates against the diplo-
matic colony. Mr. Helms went on to say that we had arrived
at a point with Nosenko where we believed we had to use
more energetic measures to arrive at the truth and determine
his mission. After we tried this we would probably wish
to turn him back to the Soviets.
At the point it was
decided to return Subject to Soviet control, he would
be served with an immigration warrant for deportation
as an undesirable alien. Afterwards, he would be flown
to Europe and allowed to return to Soviet custody. We
would probably wish to accomplish this in Berlin whero
several such turn-backs have been made in the past
and this has been accepted by the Soviets. Ambassador
Thompson asked why we could not indict the man and try
him for espionage. We explained that it would be dif-
ficult to prove this even if he were to give us a full
confession since the only evidence would be his own word.
Furthermore, we would be reluctant to become involved in
the evitable publicity that a trial of this nature would
cause. We are anxious to learn the truth but are not
interested in a trial or punishment for Nosenko.
5. Ambassador Thompson then said that the only aspect
of our planning which gave him pause was the idea of re-
curning the man to Soviet custody. He felt that we would
inevitably encounter criticism from the press if they
speculated the turn-back was in exchange for the release
of the three flyers. This the Government would very much
wish to avoid. Mr. Murphy showed Ambassador Thompson the
draft press statement we had prepared by which we hoped
to make clear that this was not an exchange of any type
but related solely to the fraudulent character of the
Nosenko defection. This accompanied by additional news-
paper publicity would serve to make clear the real reasons
for Nosenko's return.
6. In a brief aside with Mr. Davis, the discussion
of the letters came up and we had an inconclusive dis-
cussion of them. We agreed that the letter which was to
be read by the wife on the Embassy premises should not be
sent to the Embassy nor should the Embassy become involved
in this. We also discussed the possibility of sending the
other letter through regular mail channels to the wife's
address. We did not discuss what the Embassy was to say
if the wife called again and I feel I must go back to Mr.
Davis on this question.
7. Mr. Hughes then asked if we were sure we had
received all we could under the present circumstances.
lle was assured we had and this was explained in some
detail. We described the CE information received from
Subject, noting how some of it was aimed quite clearly
at covering leads provided by Golitsyn. At this point,
Mr. Helms described for the State Department officials
the history of our attempts to persuade the French to
take vigorous action on these leads and their failure
to do so indicating there are still active penetrations
in the French intelligence services and elsewhere in the
government.
3. The meeting ended with Ambassador Thompson sug-
gesting he would like to brief the Secretary on the
problem and also discuss it with the State Department
legal advisor, Abram Chayes, and then he would be back
in touch with us. lle asked the other Department officers
present not to discuss this case with other persons.
David E. Murphy
Chief, SR Division

