1000000
104-10332-10015
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
VIA TELECOPIER
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
C/IP & CRD
Kathy Kelly
OGC/LD
12 January 1994
Michael Scott FOIA Request
1. As you may be aware, the DCI has received
correspondence from an attorney for Michael Scott ("Scott"),
son of the former COS/Mexico City, regarding Scott's FOIA
requests for information concerning his father, Winston
McKinley Scott ("Winston Scott"). I understand that Scott
has two FOIA requests outstanding currently, numbers 91-1231
(requesting all information on Winston Scott) and 93-1040
(requesting re-review of Winston Scott's unpublished
manuscript).
2. Our records indicate that CIA processing of FOIA
request number 91-1231 is completed, pending referral of two
documents for coordination to the FBI and the Department of MOU 93
the Navy. During the processing of FOIA request 91-1231,
Winston Scott's affiliation with the CIA became publicly
acknowledged pursuant to information releases processed by
the Historical Review Group under the Assassination Records
Collection Act ("ARCA"). Pursuant to ARCA, certain chapters
of Winston Scott's manuscript also were released in full.
3. The CIA's response to Scott's outstanding FOIA
requests should take into consideration the ARCA
disclosures.
4. Please inform me of the current anticipated
completion date of the processing of Scott's FOIA requests.
Specifically, would it be possible to release the documents
for which the CIA has completed processing (request number
91-1231) and to request that the other two referrant
agencies (FBI and Navy) respond directly to Scott, in view
of the unusual equities in this case? As always, your
assistnce in this matter is appreciated greatly. Please
contact me with any questions you may have. A copy of
certain of the relevant correspondence is enclosed for your
convenience.
Encl.
Kety
Kathleen Kelly
13-00000
To: C/HRG
Subject: Request from Scott's son
Scot
The HSCA-orginated material in the CIA JFK Collection
and HSCA documents referred to the CIA by NARA are scheduled
for review later this year. I expect copies of the two
documents mentioned in Mark Zaid's letter to be within this
material. However, there is no inventory of this materials
and a search could be very time consuming.
HSCA documents referred to the CIA by NARA are usually
held at NARA for review by an HRG reviewer (John C). NARA
has sent some documents (mainly testimonies) directly to HRG
but two documents are not among them.
The HSCA report on Oswald in Mexico city was released
in August 1993. The pages attached to Zaid's letter are
from that report.
We could ask NARA to pull the two documents and send
them over for review. Otherwise, they will be released
later this year.
13-00000
PRIORITY HANDLING FOIA REQUEST
SUBJECT: (Optional)
RE: WINSTON MACKINLEY SCOTT
REQUEST NUMBER
SULLIVAN, SHERRY
F91-1231
FROM:
Robert Mahlke
Pat Berlin
IP&CRD/ISG/OIT
TO: (Officer, designation, room number, and
building)
2083/30559
2766/30565
EXTENSION DATE SENT
14 January 1994
SUSPENSE DATE
DATE
FOR
6E2914
PCI/IRO-Kathy Kolos
HQS
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
FOR
FIO/HRG
406 Ames Bldg.
OFFICER'S
INITIALS
RECEIVED FORWARDED
27 Jan 8Feb94
94
2-10-94
COMMENTS (Number each comment to show from
whom to whom. Draw a line across column after
each comment.)
Please review the attached FOIA
request.
PLS NOTE KATHY KOLOS
Based upon the additional infor
provided in paragraph 2 of OGC's
12 Jan 94 memo and additional
info provided by Mr. Zaid, it
is requested that the DCI task
HRG to search records regarding
this case. It is also requested
that the request be placed in the
queue as though you had rec'd
it back in 1991.
8.
9.
1 to 3: Please note above
and provide your response
as soon as possible.
10.
11.
12.
ACTION: DCI
RETURN TO:
IP&CRD/ISG/OIT 1107AmesBldg.
FORM 3749
1-79.
PRIORITY HANDLING FOIA REQUEST
13-00000
17 February 1994
MEMORANDUM FOR:
VIA:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Information Review Officer/DCI
CSI/FOIA Referent
John F.Pereira
Chief, Historical Review Group
FOIA Request F91-1231
The two documents requested are items that were
originated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations
(HSCA). There are entries to this effect ("Agency: HSCA")
in the two identification forms submitted by the requestor.
Under the JFK Records Assassination Law, CIA does not have
authority to release Congressionally-originated materials.
Our role is to coordinate such materials upon request. The
National Archives has been delegated authority by the
Congress to process HSCA-originated records.
Poreian
John F. Pereira
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
24 June 1996
MEMORANDUM FOR: Fred Wickham
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Barry Harrelson
ARRB Request re Angelton and Scott
1. Jeremy Gunn, ARRB staff, has requested (via
telephone) access to the following files/documents:
a. Winston Scott documents, including the entire
manuscript It Came to Little, and personal effects seized on
Winston Scott's death;
vault.
b. files of James Angelton housed in the CI
2. As Linda Cipriani handled the recent FOIA
litigation brought by Michael Scott (Win's son) for all
documents on his father, Linda has copies of documents
responsive to Gunn's first request in her office. I have
spoken with Linda and we agree that, with your concurrence,
the best course of action would be to have Gunn view the
Scott documents and manuscript at OGC. You should be aware
that during the course of that litigation, searches were
conducted to locate personal effects seized by CIA upon
Scott's death. Those effects were never located, but a
destruction record that seems to refer to these personal
effects was located and provided to OGC. Gunn would need
access to that destruction record as well.
3. The second request of Gunn also was an issue in
the Scott FOIA litigation. At that time the DO told IP&CRD
that all Angelton documents were sorted through in the 1970s
and that a separate CI Angelton holding no longer exist.
Official files were incorporated into DO record system and
material not deemed to be official records were destroyed.
To the extent that any destruction records exist on
Angelton's records, Jeremy would like to see these as well.
Linda and I suggest that the DO search for any such
destruction records and forward them to OGC. In this way,
Jeremy can view them at the same time he views the Scott
documents.
4. Jeremy has agreed that if CIA allows him to view
the above records "informally" and he finds nothing that
relates to the assassination, then he will not make an
"official request" for these records. Of course, any
records he believes to be relevant, he will have to make an
official request and they will then become part of the JFK
Collection.
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
5. Please let me know if you have any problems with
the above proposal. Feel free to phone me (30292) or Linda
(76124) if you have any questions or concerns.
CC: C/HRG
Linda Cipriani
Ellie Neiman
Barry Harrelson
2
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
JAN 24 97 03:20PM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
Central Intelligence Agency
Office of General Counsel
Washington, D.C. 20505
P.1/4
Date: 01/24/97
(Gesent to Do 21 apr. 97
To: Barry Harrelson
Organization: HRG
Phone: 31825
Fax: 703-613-3060
From: Linda C. Cipriani
Organization: OGC
Phone:
76124
Fax:
703-874-4346
i
Number of Pages (Including Cover) 4
Comments: This is the document Jeremy thinks is an
assassination record. Although the last page is not marked
classified, I think it got cut off when it was faxed to me. My
assumption is that the entire record is classified SECRET.
Have fun Linda
SECRET
13-00000
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE
FOR THE
DIRECTORIATE OF OPERATIONS.
1
40-89
(UPDATED JUNE 1992)
CENTRAL
AL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY
:
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:21AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
Central Intelligence Agency
Office of General Counsel
Washington, D.C. 20505
Date: 01/24/97
To: Barry Harrelson
Organization: HRG
Phone: 31825
Fax: 703-613-3060
From: Linda C. Cipriani
Organization: OGC
Phone:
76124
Fax:
703-874-4346
P.1/8
Number of Pages (Including Cover) 8
Comments: These are the notes that Jeremy wrote up. I
will have CIC and Fred Wickham do the classification
reviews. You will note that in all three, he finds some
assassination records. Lets discuss this next week.
Linda
P.S. I stamped
these "secret" until Hey have
been classifed
SECRET by He Do
4
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:23AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
DRAFT NOTES BY TIG FOR ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
JANUARY 13, 1997
P.2/8
On January 13, 1997, Michelle Combs and Jeremy Gunn from the ARRB Staff reviewed the files
of Winston McKinley Scott at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia. The General Counsel's office
stated that that the files presented for our examination are the "complete" files known to the CIA on Scott.
The documents total approximately 6 inches, and include:
(1) A manuscript entitled "It Came to Little," by Ian Maxwell (pseud.), which contains 221
enumerated pages. The foreword to the manuscript states that the events recounted therein contain "no
exaggerations and no deviations from basic truth." (unpaginated forward). It reveals that some true.
names have been used, and that this has been done without the consent of the persons named. The author
expresses his "most sincere admiration and utmost respect for: Mr. John Edgar Hoover, Director, Federal
Bureau of Investegation [sic]; Mr. James R. Murphy, wartime director of OSS/X-2; and particularly, the
late Allen Welsh Dulles, OSS Chief in Switzerland during World War II, a principal architect in the
creation of CIA for President Harry Truman and the Greatest Director CIA has had." The author refers to
the blight of communism, and the courageous people who have worked to fight it, but nevertheless
concludes that "all the effort [to thwart Communism) has come to little." (unpaginated forward)
There is only one chapter that makes any identifiable reference to the assassination of President
Kennedy and to the events related to Mexico City at the time Lee Harvey Oswald was alleged to have
visited. That chapter has been released in full to the public.
(2) A Supplemental Declaration of J. Barry Harrelson from the case Michael Scott v. CIA, CA
No. 1:95CV00686 with attached documents. The attached documents contain documents released in full
and some that are redacted. According to CIA, all redacted documents are a part of the JFK collection,
This should be confirmed. If they are part of the collection, no further steps need be taken. If not, they
must be fully reviewed to determine whether they are assassination records.
(3) Documents that appear to be copies of the personnel file of Win Scott. All of the documents
in this file were reviewed to determine whether any assassination records are included. Our review
disclosed no "assassination records." Although not assassination records, the following information was
located in the personnel file:
-- The records disclose that during World War II, while in the employ of the FBI, Scott worked in
"connection with espionage and subversive activities" and in "counterespionage" while based in Havana.
- Document, dated 7/23/69, refers to the possibility that CIA might attempt to recruit Scott for
the "Civilian Reserve Program (HR 20-15) following his retirement from the agency.
- On May 6, 1969, Scott was recommended for a Distinguished Intelligence Medal by William
V. Broe, who was then Chief of WH. The recommendation includes the following statement:
"Mr. Scott built a large and highly effective organization targeted against highest priority
national security targets; namely, the Soviet bloc presence south of the border. Given the nature
of the target, Mr. Scott molded his station with a predominantly CI orientation until it has
become a highly effective counterintelligence mechanism capable of covering Soviet Bloc and
Cuban [activities]."
His Citation for the Distinguished Intelligence Medal includes the following statement:
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:23AM USGOVERNMENT
SCOPET
2
P.3/8
"[He has served brilliantly in Mexico for over twelve years where among other things he has
built a remarkable counterintelligence machine-a true bulwark helping to guard our southern
border. His station has long been a showcase of technical intelligence methods as well as
classical operations."
- There is no record in the file that suggests, one way or the other, that Mr. Scott was ever
treated for or suffered from any mental or emotional issue.
Unless the following are already part of the JFK collection, they should be designated “assassination
records" and processed under the JFK Act.
-AR: Doc. 93: 8 Oct. 1976 for Chief, Security Analysis Group from (xxx) in Security Analysis
Group, subject: Philip B. F. AGEE Exposure of CIA Personnel (4 pp.).
- AR: Doc. 94: discussion of Chapter 21 of manuscript.
- AR: Doc. 129: discussion of chapter 21 of manuscript
- AR: Doc, 131: discussion of removing Scott papers after his death
-AR: Doc. 132: ditto
- AR: Doc. 134 brief message re: manuscript
i.
TJG was shown the Records Control Schedule that appears to document the destruction of some Win Scott
documents. This record should, perhaps, be designated an "assassination record."
Queries/follow-up:
Vorification no other WS filles
Process ARS
Which records are already in collection?
ARRB must still review any Scott destruction schedules,
iten
faxed by
Linde..
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:25AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
P.4/8
DRAFT NOTES BY TIG FOR ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
JANUARY 15, 1997
Cleveland Cram
Untitled (History of the old Cl staff) (beginning to dismissal of Angleton)
11 Volumes (c. 1981)
Albert S. Bonner
The Post-Angleton CI Staff
2 volumes (July, 1993)
The ARRB requested access to any and all internal CIA histories of the CI staff for the purpose of
determining whether they contain any information that would be useful for understanding the
assassination of President Kennedy, including, for example, the activities of Lee Harvey Oswald, the
structure of CI with respect to the components of the office that had responsibility for handling Oswald's
file at different times (particularly CI/SIG), and any aspect of HTLINGUAL related to Oswald. Because
the Agency keeps these historios closely held, it was believed that they are relatively more likely to be
candid assessments of CI and its activities than one might obtain from more widely circulate documents.
I was provided complete access to the entire 11 volumes of Cleveland Cram's (untitled) history of the old
CI staff. The Cram history covers counterintelligence at the CIA from its origins to the departure of
James Jesus Angleton. The histories appear as typed legal-size pages in green, cardboard folders. The.
first volume is hand dated (1981) and signed "Cleveland Cram." There are 1063 pages in the Cram
history. I was also provided complete access to Al Bonner's history of counterintelligence, which starts
with the departure of Angleton and continues to the present.
By all appearances, the histories appear to be relatively candid assessments of CI. I was able to identify
information that illuminated some of the issues of concern, and those will be outlined below. I identified
no information that would lead to any significant reevaluation of the role of CI in issues related to Oswald
or to the assassination. For the purpose of understanding the assassination of the President or the other
issues that come within the scope of the Review Board's mandate - other than the information identified
below - I do not believe that the histories themselves, nor copies of any of the pages of the historics,
would provide any significant useful additional information that would enhance the understanding of the
assassination and I see no need for any further information to be released from the histories. It is my
preliminary judgment that the page numbers highlighted below should be copied and attached to this
memorandum so that they can be made public.
The information contained in the histories consists largely of case studies of important counterintelligence
activities. As a rule, the histories do not describe the structure of the CI offices, the personnel, the filing
system, or operations generally - although discussion of some of these issues arises. The principal
sources used by the authors consisted of documents from CI and interviews with officers. There are
relatively few footnotes and the citations are, accordingly, quite thin. There are, for example, only 8
footnotes in volume 1, which themselves are sketchy. The points that enhance the historical
understanding of the assassination are:
1. The introduction to Cram's history refers to an earlier CI history that was written by a person
who was provided only limited access to Angleton and the files. The author of the first history
was given, for example, no access to any CI/SIG documents. Cram, accordingly, found the
history to bo unhelpful for understanding sensitive CI activities. (Cram, p. 1-2). There are
references to two additional documents that should be requested: the Goleniewski study on
Golitsyn (1975) and the John Hart study on Nosenko (called the "Monster Plot"). (Charles
Battaglia, Staff Director of the SSCI, told me that the ARRB should request the Monster Plot for
review under the JFK Act.)
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:25AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
P.5/8
2
2. There is a reference to a 1959 IG survey of CI which should be requested for review. (See,
e.g., Cram 47, 56
3. The 1959 IG analysis stated the within the CI staff, "96 were professionals, 75 clerical and
four staff agents. The Staff also had one Headquarters contract agent, and several agents under
projects." (Cram, 48).
4. There is a discussion of the Special Investigations Unit (circa 1959) and HTLINGUAL,
Copies of pages 49-51, and 55, which describe the SIU and HTLINGUAL, should be evaluated to
determine whether they contribute to understanding of relevant issues.
5. Angleton was on sick leave from the agency from May, 1960 to 12 January 1961. During
Angleton's absence, S. Herman Horton was Acting Chief and James Hunt was Acting Deputy
Chief. Hunt subsequently became the regular deputy and served until 1969. (Cram, 58).
6. Routine liaison with FBI was conducted by Jane Roman "from the late 1940s onward...."
(Cram, 70). Sensitive matters were handied, however, by Angleton or Hunt (Cram, 70) although
this practice "did not develop until the early 1960s after the defection of Golitsyn...." (Cram,
71).
7. The activities of CI/SIG are described on pp. 144-45. Cram's cited sources are the 1955 and
1973 descriptions of its activities. It should be decided whether these two pages should be copied
for attachment to this memo.
I did not find that the references to Nosenko provided additional information that enhances the historical
understanding of the assassination. Mr. Angleton's testimony to the Church Committee is much more
illuminating in that regard.
....
The Bonner history, although after the period of Oswald and the assassination, discusses the issues of the
disposition of the files of James Jesus Angleton and a few other matters. Because of the speculation about
the contents of the files, discussions of their disposition would seem to be relevant. The pertinent points
are as follows:
Bonner volume 1:
1. Bonner describes the CI staff, at the departure of Angleton, as being seriously unorganized
and as being intellectually detached from the work of the agency. (Bonner, p. 1:6-8.)
2. The Angleton office files were voluminous and in disarray at the time of his departure from
the Agency. It may be appropriate to make copies of pp. 1:8 (last paragraph) up to the last
paragraph on p. 14, 53-57 to illustrate this.
3. "[Fliles were found on the assassinations of President John F. Kennedy and his brother Robert
F. Kennedy. These included autopsy pictures of the remains of Robert Kennedy. Although
Nosenko's account of the KGB's involvement with Lee Harvey Oswald and his denial that the
KGB had anything to do with the murder of John Kennedy might reasonably explain an
Angleton interest in the John Kennedy assassination, neither Kalaris nor Blee, with whom
Kalaris consulted on this bizarre finding, had any idea why Angleton had the pictures. Neither
could they think of any reason why it was appropriate for CI Staff files to contain them. They
were accordingly destroyed." (Bonner, p. 1:11). I subsequently interviewed Bonner, who told me
SECRET
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:26AM USGOVERNMENT
P.6/8
3
SECRET
that he had spoken to Kalaris and Blee about this, and neither man could remember anything in
the files except the Robert Kennedy photographs.
4. The files revealed evidence that Angleton ran "countorintelligence [operations] abroad as
Chief of the CI Staff in the way in which the local station would be effectively cut out and
command channel and communications would run direct to counterintelligence headquarters in
Washington." (Bonner, p. 1:22.) (sic). I believe Bonner is saying the following: Angleton ran
counterintelligence operations abroad as Chief of the CI Staff in such a way that local stations
would be effectively cut out; command channel and communications would run direct to
counterintelligence headquarters in Washington.
5. Bonner cites two examples where Angleton ran liaison with friendly governments without the
local station chiefs being specifically aware of Angleton's activities. The station chiefs found this
"frustrating." (Bonner, pp. 1:25-26).
6. (Circa 1976) "[Handling [FOIA requests for information concerning Lee Harvey Oswald]
required the creation of a task force of 13 operations officers and analysts, plus clerical personnel,
and their full-time efforts for over a month." (Bonner, p. 1:67.)
7. Discussion of activities of part of CI staff circa 1976: "Double Agent Branch -- was charged
with the conduct of and coordination on double agent operations abroad. Since the vast majority
of DA cases were run by the US military services, the FBI, or--in some instances--foreign-liaison
services, the branch was very heavily a coordinator rather than active runner of operations."
(Bonner, p. 1:71).
8. Bonner refers to an August 1976 IG report sometimes called the Freer report. It analyzes
Angleton's stewardship over CI compared to that of Kalaris. It discusses how Angleton ran CI.
We should review this report. (It is cited in Mangold, Cold Warrior, at 316.]
Bonner volume II:
The only significant reference in Bonner pertains to the final completion of the review of the Angleton
files. (Bonner, p. I:114.)
SECRET
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:27AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
DRAFT NOTES BY KMHC AND TIG FOR ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
REVIEW OF MANGOLD V. CIA FILES
JANUARY 13 and 24, 1997
P.7/8
The Mangold v. CIA FOIA litigation files consist of 7 redwelds, totalling approximately 18 inches. They
are organized by "tabs," which can be described as follows:
Tab A: copies of published newspaper and magazine clippings that were released in full. I see no need to
designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
Tab B: copies of published newspaper articles, the texts of which have been released in full. The agency
did redact marginalia, which consisted exclusively of file names and indicators. I see no need to
designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
Tab C: documents about Angleton from the 1940s, including his career with OSS. I see no need to
designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
Tab D: docs 94-230. AR (unless already part of the collection): Docs. 95 (24 Νον. 1978
Memorandum JJA testimony to HSCA). On December 11, 1978, the D.C.-based law firm of Duncan,
Brown filed a FOIA request on behalf of James Angleton in conjunction with his anticipated testimony
before the HSCA. Presumably all records related to this matter are AR and should be processed under the
JFK Act. Sce doc. nos. 109-116, 120, 121.
Includes fitness reports (not designated). All of the fitness reports were reviewed to determino whether
they contained probative information.
Tab E: documents previously released to Edward J. Epstein in response to a request for book reviews from
CIA's internal journal "Studies in Intelligence." These documents are all copies of book reviews from
Studies in Intelligence on issues related to intelligence. I see no need to designate any documents as
assassination records from the set.
Tab F contains documents previously released to Henry Hurt in response to a request for documents
concerning Alexander Orlov. Most of the documents are newspaper articles and reprints of Senate
testimony. I see no need to designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
Tab G contains documents previously released to A. Doppelt (on behalf of The Readers Digest in
response to a request for documents concerning Nicholas Shadrin. These documents include a speech by
DCI Turner, testimony by Capt. Nikolai Fedorovich Artamonov (Shadrin) before the Comittee on Un-
American Activities (Sept. 14, 1960), a transcript of a Panorama show on Artamonov, and extensive
correspondence from his wife to various USG officials about Shadrin's dissappearance. I see no need to
designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
enhance
historical understand
The Denied Documents File contains no assassination records and probably no EHUs, with the possible
exception of the following records:
From Category VII: nos. 496, 498, 499, 500, 510
Doc. no. 496 is directly relevant for potential future leads. The document is a memorandum
dated February 7, 1974. Docs. 498 is of interest regarding the Mafia, Teamsters, and Hoffa.
Docs. 499-500, 510 regard allegations concerning assassination plots.
Otherwide, the Denied Documents file contains background information on JA, medical records, signed
Special Clearance forms, administrative personnel information, information from denied FOIA requests,
13-00000
JAN 27 '97 10:28AM USGOVERNMENT
SECRET
and various memoranda relating to different conversations between JA and Agency officers on a wide
variety of issues.
The Partial Releases File contains no assassination records and no EHUs. This file contains OSS
background information, OS files, administrative personnel information, and medical records. I see no
need to designate any documents as assassination records from the set.
P.8/8
13-00000
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
J. Barry Harrelson
Fredrick C. Wickham @ DO
05/20/97 01:39:01 PM
DO Records Control Schedule
The entire DO Schedule is classified Secret, however, the specific page with item 305 Working Papers does not contain classified
information and I have no problem with Jeremy's request to include this one page in the JFK collection as evidence that we have an
approved schedule that allows us to destroy working copies of documents.
CC:
Kenneth R. Johnson @ DO, Eileen M. Wukitch @ DO, William H. McNair @ DO, Christopher J. Olsen @ DO
OK
(per Eileen, 23 May 97
also release destin
notice
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
13-00000
fib
Administrative - Internal Use Only
27 May 1997
Memorandum for the Record
Subject:
Scott's files--Records Control Schedule and
Destruction Notice
Reference:
Fax from Linda C. Cipriani, dated 01/24/97,
same subject
1. Jeremy Gunn requested that the attached page from
the DO's Record Schedule contianing item 40-76 and the
destruction notice for Winston Scott's Mexico City Files be
declared Assassination Records (AR).
2. Per Fred Wickham and Eileen Wukitch, the Directorate
of Operations has no objection to the public release of
these two pages as ARS. The two item will be incorporated
into the Agency's JFK Collection and copies send to NARA.
CC: Eileen Wukitch
Linda Cipriani
Comb 5/29/97
ARRB staff
J. Barry Harrelson
Administrative - Internal Use Only
13-00000
OLO SCACOULE
ДАО ЕТЕМ NOSS).
40-76
Item CA
ITEN
NO.
304
40-76
Itam CS
305
40-76
Itsa C6
asb
FILES FOENT IF ICATION
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
VOLUNC
DISPOSITION INSTRUCTIONS
RESEARCH AND REFERENCE FILES
Correspondance, reports, memoranda used
for general referance and for purpoван
resulting in summaries and studies. Also
includes extra copies of books or other
publications maintained for issuance as well
as for referenca purposes. Includee
materiala generally not processed into the
central system regarding operational research
to include activities of a sensitive nature
or those which were transitory targets of
opportunity.
NORKING PAPERS
>
Documents from varied sources as well as
rough notes, drafts, forms, logs, machine/
listings, etc., accumulated and temporarily
maintained separate from any file system
until a specific job has been completed oε
until the information has been incorporated
Into a consolidated report. This collection
may also include folders and documents
temporarily charged out from a file system.
CHRONOLOGICAL FILES
Duplicates of correspondence retained an a
ready reference. Filed chronologically.
Subject file copy is the pacord copy.
(Rod-record)
Chief and Deputy Chief, Staff and
División Level and Above.
b. Below Chief and Deputy Chief, Staff and
Division Lavel.
RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE
CONTINUATION SHEET
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
5
TEMPORARY. Retire to AARC 3 years
after file becomes inactive and in
no longer needed for references
then review in 3 years for
destruction. Earlier dieposal of
more transitory material is author-
ized. Return materials on loan to
the loaning office and forward
purchased books to the Agency
Library when no longer needed.
{
TEMPORARY. Destroy upon completion
of a specific joh or as they serve
their purpose. Return folders and
documents on loan and destroy
remaining papers.
Refer to Itea 102 of this schedule.
TEMPORART, Destroy no later than 1
year after catoff. Cat off at end
of each calendar year. Hold in
current files area for up to 1 year,
then destroy..
23
"
141
306
13-00000
13-00000
----5----0--------0---5---- BEGINNING OF DISPLAY -------0----5----0----5--
***
RETIRED RECORD TABLE (RRT)
JOB
BOX FOLDER
78-005848 0001 001
ΟΡΙ
45
ITEM NUMBER
305
CUSTODIAN
CI/AG
RETIREMENT DATE FILE NUMBER
11 AUG 72
DISP
DESTR
DISP DATE
JAN 67
OLD COMP
CI
SCHEDULE
40-76
CHANGE DATE
12 JAN 87
JOR TITLE: CHIEF OF STATION, MEXICO CITY FILES
COLLECTION IN PILES OF STATION AT TIME OF DEATH OF
COS, WINSTON M. SCOTT