14-0000
104-10215-10029
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
AMLASH/1
Rolando CUBELA Secades
born 19 Jan 1933
Subject is former protege of Raul CASTRO and former President of
commie-oriented Castro student organization, "Federation of University
Students", in Havana. Subject was also one-time major in revolutionary
army. When Subj took over FEU, a purge, commie-style, of students and
faculty was commenced. FEU ultimately took over administration of
Havana Univ. Subj is reported to have gradually become dissaffected
with Castro Govt and has contemplated defection for some time. Latest
indications of Subj's attitude came from contacts of AMCONCERT/1
and an unidentified FBI source in Miami. Subj has now been relieved
of his Presidency of FEU, allegedly because of booze and women, but
probably because he didn't play ball with the PSP re Univ politics.
Subj is considered by friends to be anti-Communist and also rather
critical of the USA.
:
First contact with Subj by & KUBARKER was during a meeting in Mexico
City on 9 March 1961. This meeting was arranged by Subj good friend,
Carlos TEPEDINO, Cuban dissident now in jewelry business in NYC.
The staffer was Jack Stewart, also a good long time acquaintence
of TEPEDINO's. The meeting was merely "to exchange views on Cuba",
and Subj made certain that Stweart understood this. S.bj admitted
however that trouble in Cuba tany was the PSP and the manner in which
they were influencing Cuban govt today. Stewart made no commitments
but did offer, if Subj should so desire, listen to whatever Subj had
to say in the future and to offer what aid was within his power.
Subf was again the subject of interest and potential defection op
whe
attended French National Student Union Cultural Festival
but
Ang 1961 at Pontier, France. Paris was given OK to approach Subf
far as file reflects (and French Desk) no effort was ever
This particularly baffling since Subj had sent a message
to TEDEDINO via a girl friend who came Miami ind who came Miami that he desired
with "friend of Stewart's"in Stewart's"in Paris Paris if if possible.
14-0000
On 15 June of this year it was learned from a reliable source that
Subj was going to attend the Helsinki Youth Festival in July-Aug 1962.
He was to go via Hills Prague. Finnish Liaison sources reported on
5 July that Subj had applied for a visa to attend the festival fron
20 July thru 9 August. In view of evidence, it decided that Subj
vas ripe for appraoch. AMCONCERT/1 stated that TEPEDINO person with
most influence over Sudj. cA/PROP Staff felt best det for our money
would be have Subj defect during last week of Festival and give widest
possible press play to defection, including statement of Sbj's
dissatisfaction with present Cuban govt. Due Finnish sensitivity
and Soviet pressure, it felt that Subj defection fed played low key
Hels press, then take him Copenhagen for larger play via Station assets
there. Then bring Miami for debriefing personality leads, Cuba conditions,
eto
Due pressing committents Hels station, it felt necessary to have
His case officer accompany TEPEDINO and guide/ support the attempt
against Subj. KUBARK will pay expenses TEPEDINO and return expenses
Cubelo, providing he is ball our way.
TEPEDINO has POA, has expressed to Miami officer, his willingness
go Europe to help Subj. Plan already laid on for contact and briefing
TEPEDINO in NYC this week.
NOTE: On 8 July TEPEDINO informed Sloman that he had received
a postcard on 30 June postmarked Vienna, Milf from Subj saying that
TEPEDINO should not fail meet him Paris in August 62.
*
TEPEDINO revealed to Sloman on 8 July that he had been in touch
with FBI in Miami. Also mentioned that he was dissatisfied with
previous KJBARK efforts re Cubela's planned defection in Paris
summer 61, and for this reason he approached FBI.(Can we
then assume that (and I think we can) Alt FBI knowe of TEPEDINO's
interest in defecting Subj? Also interesting that FBI
indicated no interest in TEPEDINO when we ran POA check with them
weak of 2 July.

