14-00000
104-10250-10078
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
27 July 1965
:
Herman Kimsey
SUBJECT
03
1. On 23 July, Mrs. (Thea Hall) advised the following
regarding her call from Mr. Kimsey. Mr. Kimsey did not direct-
ly question her on activities of individuals within the
Questioned Documents Section of TSD. She, however, had as
strong impression that he was well informed on what was
going on on a rather current basis. He appeared to be'aware
that Mrs. (Hall) had changed her location of employment. As he
03
has done in the past, he indicated that he knew that Lon Thomas
was not working hard and for all intents and purposes was not
doing his job. He indicated that Jan Beck was overworked
because he had to carry most of the load in QDS and that
he might be considering getting another job. Kimsey appeared
to be concerned regarding this, as he had predicted it in the
past, and he felt that if this happened, the QDS capability
would be lost to TSD and the Agency. Kimsey considers him-
self responsible for all the good work involved in the estab-
lishment of the QDS capability in TSD. Kimsey further reitera-
ted that desk officers within TSD had advised him that there
is no respect for QDS in TSD, that work they sent to QDS to be
done usually was not done in time, thus in decision making they
do
not want
for
the QDS
2/pl
14-00000
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
In addition, Kimsey stated that he had talked to people return-
ing from Okinawa who said that at the time of Lon Thomas's
TDY to Okie about a year ago, Thomas didn't do any work and
would not handle their problems.
2. Kimsey talked at length about his work, reiterating
that he was in charge of security for Goldwater's eampaign
during his campaign. He claimed that he has recently been
Not sel
WAS McDaniell
formsly s
LA County
Sherrifts
asked to handle security requirements for Martin Luther King's Vavator?
He
forthcoming trip to Washington, and that when the job was offered
he was advised that four additional people would be required,
and that he would be paid $10 a hour for his services. He
indicated that he declined this job offer because he felt that
some people around Dr. King were interested in other causes.
Kimsey advised that he was currently involved in selling
electronic alarm systems, that they have a contract to install
such a system in the new Kuwait Embassy on Connecticut Avenue.
03
Mrs. (Hall) indicated that he was not doing this on his own,
but had a friend who is unknown in with him. Kimsey inferred
that he also had a prospect for a similar job with the Belgian
Embassy. Kimsey went on to say that he has close contacts with
the UAR Embassy in Washington. He described the Embassador as
being a journalist by profession and that both he and his wife
were born in Palistine. Kimsey apparently discussed the
dichotomy of this but inferred that it was pretty common knowledge
and the subject of some joking around town.
14-00000
2/PN
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
3. Kimsey continues to be deeply involved in the
Goleniewski case which was publicised in the Washington Daily
News on 19 June 1965. He still thinks that this man is the
son of Czar Nicholas II, and that none of this family died
in the Bolshevik massacre as reported at the time. At this
point, he indicated that he continues to work closely with the
security people at Langley seeing them every few days on
this matter. In addition, he stated that he had close liaison
with the FBI. Kimsey said that a translation of some papers
connected with the Anastasia case will soon be published in
California, and that these papers make no reference to the
fact that members of his family were killed in 1918. Eugenia
Smith, who claims to be Anastasia, a woman now in her middle
60's, was said to be suing Speller & Co. over publishing of
the Anastasia book. Kimsey inferred that Eugenia Smith is a
nymphomaniac, has a daughter and a granddaughter who are living
behind the Iron Curtain, and who are blackmailing her not to
accept the identity of Anastasia. He further inferred that
she has travelled quite a number of times to Europe and that
recently she has had difficulty with the immigration authorities
who might deport her. Her trial is due to come up in October, 1965.
03
4. A questioning of Mrs. (Hall) regarding her assessment
of the personal characteristics and stability of Kimsey reflects
the following. Mrs. (Hall) said that Kimsey, while an Agency
employee, had psychiatric problems and at one time had been
14-00000
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
seeing a psychiatrist. She does not know further details
regarding this. When he left the Agency (701), he was
visibly shaken and upset, however, his basic pride and
personality prevented him from showing outward agony at
the decision. He instead covered up/his many references
to the many other jobs that he had been offered to him in
the Agency or made references to the fact that he was not
leaving at all, but would be working as a consultant on
some of the more important Agency problems. Mrs. (Hall) indi-
cates that she considers him to be paranoiac. He however
alleges that he has strong loyalties to the Agency and tries
to always continue the facade that he is current on matters
relating to the Agency and is importantly involved in Agency
activities. He continues to live at the W Hotel in Washington,
basically a very lonely person.
Curtis H. McSherry
Chief
TSD/Liaison Security Staff