14-00000
104-10166-10166
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
6-82-1
10 October 1975
MEMORANDUM FOR: CIA Review Group
FROM:
SUBJECT: Special Assistant to the DCI
Review of CIA Relationships with Pan American
World Airways, Its Subsidiaries and Individuals
1. Attached is a report to me certifying that the ICD records
on Pan American World Airways (PAA) have been searched. My review
of the possible Category III items is as follows:
Item 4.a. The individuals mentioned are probably
Mr. and Mrs. George de Mohrenschildt of Dallas who, I
believe, are the only ones I am acquainted with
both Lee Harvey Oswald and President Kennedy; not
Category III and of no consequence in my judgment.
Items 4.d. and e. reveal nothing improper in
these; the documents summarize in draft the
cooperation of a PAA employee with the Air Force
after coordination with CIA. There would be no
impropriety in Air Force passing or otherwise
rewarding a PAA employee for his assistance, a
common Air Force practice.
Item 4.f. Based on Dr. Affinito and Miss Schrodt's
comment, I directed that another search should be made
because the memoranda suggests that CIA might be
able to use its influence with American firms, including
PAA, to make "Obuto's" trip to the US a success. There
is no indication anywhere in our case correspondence,
however, that Identity 27, an Africa Division officer,
visited CIA's New York Field Office on this matter or that
the subject was ever discussed further than in this single
piece of correspondence.
Item 4.h. The comment is flatly incorrect in
that PAA 635 current that CIA material on the
Soviet SST be given to (PAA) CIA New York Field Office
120
29
SECRET
-F2 1:TLET CL BT 010650
SECRET
SUBJECT: Review of CIA Relationships With Pan American World Airways,
Its Subsidiaries and Individuals
personal believe that some information was provided.
No joint action resulted to my knowledge in regard to
Agency support of PAA testing of the
2. After Mr. Schleroft and Mr. Affinito completed their survey
and signed their certification (attached), Miss Schrodt located
the additional items, 4534, 24, 69654 (attached), which
indicate that a request was made by a PAA official and responded
to by Chief, CD in regard to the contemplated Southeast Asia
operations of Continental Airlines, a possible competitor.
3. You will note an inconsistency in the titles of our
material on 1:4. Mr. Affinito and Miss Schrodt have omitted the
information they selected and have used true titles in their comments
to me.
In the interest of speed, I have not corrected this
inconsistency.
03
/s/Edward D. Colovay
JACKSON 2. NORTON
Chief, Domestic Collection Division
Attachments: A/S
SECRET