14-00000
104-10178-10072
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON
Commissioner of Narcotics
17 MAY 1959
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
Deputy Director, Plans
Bureau of Narcotics
In Europe
1. Through his intimately known CIA (CIA Internal Security
Division) this agency learned of a meeting and late evening
party held in Paris, Orléans, France, during February 29,
1956. This party and meeting were attended by two leading
members of the French underworld, and one of the leading
members of the Italian underworld. The agent reported no contact
with narcotics activity however, it was learned by his associates
that he would be handling the Chinese Communist narcotics
activities.
Commissioner of Narcotics, February 1957, he contacted the agent
and learned that there were three meetings (Spain, Morroco,
Britain) held to attempt to get the Far East narcotics into
American ports. In 1957, the agent did not handle Chinese
Communist narcotics.
2. In early 1959, this agent was in his villa outside
Marseilles. He was contacted by a man who said he would be
taking over the handling of Chinese Communist activities
relative to a ring operating in France, Italy, and Spain,
and the Congo. He would be the contact between this ring
and the head of narcotics in the Chinese Communist Government
in Peking. He would have a liaison with the Chinese
Communist party in Marseilles.
3. While in Switzerland, a crucial choice had to be taken
between the French and Italian groups. The agent had two
friends, a man and his wife (about a pair), he was
especially friendly with the French group. The agent
reported that the French group was the only one that
could guarantee the safe transit of the opium to the
opposite
side. The remaining was left that Gattibelli handled the Italian
SECRET
2/8R
SECRET
The Dutch agent, also at the "Cut-off" headed to the agent's
nervous breakdown of any fortune a motor of 1000 francs from
Orleans. It was answered. The agent that he had a meeting with
Gattibelli was held in the same place. On the next night in
Paris, two more customers came to the agent. The agent does
not recall. The Special Agent still has a supply of boxes.
4. According to the agent, there are three groups of dealers
in narcotics in contact with the Chinese Embassy at Paris (a)
the French group at Lausanne, (b) the Italian group at Rome, and (c)
the Spanish group at Casa. Also, according to the agent, the
French and Spanish groups operate in North Africa and send their
narcotics to America via Marseilles. The Italian group as far as
possible deals in narcotics in Italy and also exports to the south,
probably to North Africa. The group in Paris apparently had
empirical difficulties in their traffic and therefore at least
for the present have put their work aside.
5. The agent stated that he had seen at least 10 weed on
barrels of opium in the cellar of the Chinese Embassy building of
Kalehogorog in Corn. It can be a broatian carpet so of
copies as expressed to about 50 lbs. per box, which however have
the same dimensions as an 18-liter can on about 50 kilos
each. Each box has a rowed hole in the ten and a strong metal
seal. In his opinion the barrels would be transported by car from the Chinese
Embassy to a prearranged location and no transfer from the
first to a second car.
6. The Agency was also informed by the Agency that a
Luxembourg was only put by a French national to join the
ring and was smuggling opium in large rates from the Chinese
Communists to be smuggled to the United States. Luxembourg
expressed his willingness to follow this up if he could have the
direction of the killing. Long is willing to make
contact with the Luxembourg for whatever use you may want to make
of him.
7. Dutch Service has also informed this Agency that
they are willing to turn over their agent to this Agency for
future handling, as his contribution is no longer of immediate
interest to Dutch Security. Although this Agency has serious
SECRET
4/8R
SECRET
reservations about the reliability of the Dutch agent and his story
of Chinese Communist narcotic activity, and although this Agency would
not normally be interested in taking over the case, if your Bureau has
sufficient interest in the case matter, this Agency would be willing
to approach the BVD in arranging a transfer of the agent to a field
agent of your Bureau.
8. An indication at your earliest convenience of your Bureau's
interest in this matter and advice as to this Agency's course of
action would be very much appreciated.
CSCI - 3/734,695
Distribution:
Orig and 1- Addressee
1- RI/AN
1- CI/BLA
1- CI/Staff
1- ME/2
1- WE/2
1- FE/CHI
5 May 1959
Prepared: Richard Halstead
SECRET
5/8R

