14-00000
104-10186-10325
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
DSBRIEFING OF AUG-1
SOJECT: Docurcats Brought out by 2-1 and lis Caents Concerning
Gent 71
Them.
Compañero
1. A letter dated 20 April 1964 addressed to "CeCTO VILA" and
signed "AGUSTO". This letter requests VILA to assist bearer. The
letter was given to by the Deputy Chief of DGI (MAGUSTO") to
introduce him to the DGI officer assigned to Prague. "AGUSTO" is pseudo
used within the DGI for the Deputy Chief who is known in the Ministry of
Beiga Relations as "QAIN".
2. AWG-1 explained chat the head of the servico, Manuel PINEIRO
weat to loscow on a trip leaving Cuba 11 April 1964. The Source (A-1)
recently had returned from Mexico on 23 March 1964. After the departure
of 2BICO the Source told the Deputy Chief that it was necessary for
kiz, the Source, to go to Prague so that he could peet on 22 April with
wberto CARIILLAS DELGADO, the Secretary General PRLW in 21 Salvador.
1
These are the true name and position of CARRILLAS but the Source invented
the reason for making an operational meeting in Prague knowing that
Deputy Chief of the Service would not know any better. (The Source
gone to lexico on 14 March 1964 for the purpose of holding a meeting
with CARILLAS and other members of the Communist Party from El Salvador,
but the meeting really did not take place because the Salvadorians failed
to appear. In talking to the Deputy Chief of the Service, the Source said
that he had a meeting in lexico which made it necessar for him to have a
pecting in Frague with CARRILLAS, who had to be in Prague for still another
MEXICO
1
14-00000
-2-
mecting relating to revolutionary activities to be carried out in
El-Salvador.) The "Source did this because it seemed to his the best
way of getting out of Cuba with documents which he had gathered. The
Source was successful in convincing the Deputy Chief of the Service that
the operational meeting in Prague was a necessary follow-up to the
Source's recent trip to Mexico. When Source prepared his briefcase for
the trip out of Cuba he found that only a part of the documents which
ho had been collecting would fit, he selected those which appeared
most interesting and left the others locked in his office in the DGI.
It was the Source's intention to seck asylum once he arrived in the
free world at the first stop in Canada and to request box that he be
permitted to go to the U.S. with the documents to surrender then to
KUBARK.
3. Source collected the documents over a period of tine at
considerable risk because a number of the documents were in the possession
of otlier CUIS officers in their desks or safes. Source nade it a custom
to visit these offices and to take advantage of the temporary absence of
the officers assigned to them to steal the documents which he then put in
his om safe.
4. The Source was quite worried because he feared that when he arrived
at the airport to leave Cuba he might be required to open his briefcase,
This fear proved groundless. and he was able to leave Cuba on 21 April 64
on a flight for Prague which had tostop at Halifax, Canada,
5. Prior to leaving Cubad the Source withdrew from his savings
account in a Culxan bank all that he had which amounted to 1270 :ban
pesos. He gave this amount to his wife whose name is Luisa RODRIGUEZ
Rodriguez (maiden name same as married dame). In giving the money to her
MEXICO
EL SALVADOR
14-00000
-3-
he did not say that he intended to defect and, in fact, never gäxer
had
had given her any indication of his plans to do so. He kept her ignorant
of his intentions despite the fact that she and her father- are opposed
to the Castro Regime because he felt it better for her not to be burdened
with guilty knowledge. In giving her the money he said that possibly họ
would be delayed in Prague because the matter he had to discuss was.
complicated. lie told her therefore that he would feel better knowing
that she had sufficient funds at hand to take care of any emergencies in
connection with herself or her children (by a previous marriage); a boy,
Vincente, 13 years old, and a girl, Francisca, 12 years old.
6. The CUIS (DGI) sent a cable to prague to advise that the Source
would be arriving. Accordingly, when the Source left the plane at Halifax
it was a foregone conclusion that his failure to arrive as scheduled would
be reported to his om Service.
:
7. In addition, when the Source did arrive at ilalifac the pilot and
crew of the airplane and the other passengers became aware of the fact
that he had requested asylum in the free world. They called him a traitor
which led him to state that he was no more a traitor for leaving the present
Regime than Fidel Castro was for opposing the Batista Regime. The inter-
change of comments between the Source and those who were continuing on the
flight to Prague almost resulted in a fist fightat Halifax, The Source
took from Giba $2615 in U.S. bills
Practically all of this amount was
what remained from the advance iven to him by DGI when he went to
Mexico) r which he had not accounted) plus the advice given him for
the trip to Prague. When he declared his intention to Canadian authorities
/
PRAGUE
14-00000
2
こ
to remain in Canada he was given a receiper 2540 in American
currency (this receipt is also attached). The difference of $75.00
that he had in i pocket is too ute for expenses while in Canada, le
and in its briefcase 250 Salvadorian Coloner đếch the Canadians
Jid not given hin a receipt. (The (The confirmad confiraad that this amount.
29
was in the potassion of the Canadian Covernment.)
(The matter of the money which the Sourca had taken from Cuba later
became a problea with the Canadians, largely because on talking with
the Canadian Immigration Service the Source indicated that the money
belonged to the Qiban Government rather than to himself. This was
reported to the Canadian Sternal Affairs Office and led to a decision
by the Canadian Government to hold the money --U.S. and Salvadorian--
so that it could be returned to the Cuban Government if request: This
decision of which the Source was made aware by Raper request of
29
Lucosal made him angry and at his request the Cras told that,
in Source's opinion, if the money was returned so it would be used for
promoting revolutions in the free world which included Canada. The
RCP said that in all probability the money would not be returned to
the Cuban Government and within a matter of months would be turned
over to KUDARK for return to the Soubce Lut that the RCP could not
give it to the Source or to LANGOSCI.
RC S
29
In this connection it should be noted that when LANGOSC: arrived
in Canada no decision had been made as to the disposition which would
be made not only of the money but also of the Source himself and the
documents which he had in his possession. The The Ramo ROD TOLD LINGOSC! that
29
6162
14-00000
-5-
thair desire was to turnover the Source and everything that he had
brought to LANGASA but that this was a policy matter which had to
be resolved by the Canadian Govorivaent and not only by the the P 29
This matter made it somewhat difficult to conduct interviews with the
Source because all of them word taped by the Rand Rar and LANCOSCI had
to be careful to avoid questions or answers which put obstacles in
the path of securing the turnover of Source and what he had brought
with him. The final decision of the Canadian Government, after the
intervention of the Ottawa Station, was that the Source and the documents
could be turned over but not the moncy.
The Source said that the accounts for an Intelligence Officer in
the DGI are not subjected to close inspection and that, in fact, he
had the authority as a desk officer in charge of the Salvadorian
area to request substantial amounts for operations without any need for
accountings. A typical example is that he could draw for every traince
from his own assigned area $1200 without question. He did have to give
detailed accountings for larger expenditures.)
EL SALVADOR
21BR
14-00000
29
RCMP-8461
29
[ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE
Serial No...
$2540.00
06/221196
Received from Red CHERA
the sum of Tait Tilsandmicro
Details Cartney jar nepabaig
IGNATURE
001
٢١١٠
Dollars
59706
:
El protader go vinga
cliplomatica
2
2〜
al properte
a membre che vrante
alajala on to cao
sien
i
Y asistalo
Imelusu
میں
1.
100
justes on q. quiche peaurois clevante
tu zitancia. Santiza
en en seguinte
avion de Eubank
alessives do so llagach.
augusto
Abil 20 do 196ε
PRAGUE 41BR
14-00000
get it to yo
نزل
Shine nane mit bit he is
called "Cricket
be trust meine) in Pins og t
Porchin VILA
in Cabens Emb. in prope & abit
PRAGUE
14,00000
Agents in
is black. Bold
30-35.5"
fait, landma
ارگانه
PRAGUE