14-00000
104-10166-10128
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Rolando
EELA Secades
bora 13 Jan 1933
ANCAM/
-Subject is former protege of Paul CASTRO and former Fresident of
comie-oriented Castro student organisation, "Federation of University
Students", in Havana. Subject was also one-time major in revolutionary
army. When Subj took over FEU, a purge, commie-style, of students and
faculty was commenced. FEU ultimately took over administration of
Havana Univ. Subj is reported to have gradually become dissaffected
with Castro Govt and has contemplated defection for some time. Latest
indications of Subj's attitude came from contacts of AMCONCERT/1
and an unidentified-FBI source in Miami. Subj has now been raliaved
of his Presidency of FEU, allegedly because of boose and women, but
probably because he didn't play ball with the PSP re Univ politics.
Subj is considered by friends to be anti-Communist and also rather
critical of the USA.
First contact with Subj by a KUBARKER was during a meeting in Mexico
City on 9 March 1961. This meeting was arranged by Subj good friend,
04 Carlos Carlos TEPEDINO TEPEDINO (Cuban dissident now in jewelry business in NYC..
03
The staffer was was [Jack Stewart, also a good long time acquaintence
of TEPEDING.. 8. The meeting was merely to exchange views on Cuba",
and Subj-made certain that that Stweart understood understood this. S,bj admitted
however that trouble in Cuba y was the PSF and the manner in which
03
made no commit commitments
they were influencing Cuban govt today. Stewart
but did offer, ir Subj should so desire, listen to whatever Sub! had
to say in the future and to offer what aid was within his power.
:
03
Subj was again the subject of interest and potential defection op
when he attended French National Student Union Cultural Festival
in Aug 1961 at Fontier, France, Paris was given Ok to approach Subi
but as far es file reflects (and French Desk) no effort we ever
conducted. This particularly baffling since Subj had sent a message
104 to TEDEDING via a girl friend who came Miami that he desired to talk
with "friend of Stewart's"in Paris if possible.
03
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
7/BR
14-00000
04
in 15 June of this year it was learned from a reliable source Lat
Subj vas going to attend the Eeisini fouth Festival in July-Aug 12.
11
He was to go via Hill Prague. Finnish Liaison sommes reported on
5 July that Subj had applied for a visa to attend the Festival from
20 July thru 9 August. In view of evidence, it decided that subj
vas ripe for appracch. ANCONCERT/1 stated that TEFEDINO person with
nost influence over for Subj.CA/PROP Staff felt best bet for our money
would be have Subj defect during-last week of Festival and give widest
possible press play to defection, including statement of Subj's
dissatisfaction with present Cuban govt. Due Finnish sensitivity
and Soviet pressure, it felt that Subj defection fed played low key
24
Hels press, then take him Copenhagen for larger play via Station assets assets
there. Then bring Miami for debriefing personality leads, Cuba conditions,
०८०.
14-1
Due pressing commitments Hels-stati station
04
it felt necessary to have
Ban case officer accompany TER TEPEDINO and guide/ support the attempt
against Subj. KUBARK will pay expenses TEBEDINO and return expenses
plays
Cubelo, providing he pulga ball our way.
TEPEDING has POA, has expressed to Mismi officer, his willingness
go Europe to help Subj. Plan already laid on for contact and briefing
TEPEDINO TEPEDINO in NYC this week.
NOTE: On 8 July TEPEDINO informed Sloman that he had received
a postcard on 30 June postmarked Vienna, at froa Subf saying that
TEPEDINO should no fail meet him Paris in August 62.
04
04
TEPEDINO revealed to Sloman on 8 July that he had bawa in touch
with FBI in Miami, Also mentioned that he was dissatisfied with
previous KUBARK efforts re Cubeia's planned defeation in Paris
in summer 61, and for this reason he approached FBI. (Can we
then assume that (and I think we can)
FBI knowe of TEPEDIN'S
04
interest in defeating is subj? Also interesting that FBI
indicated no interest in TEPEDINO when we ran POA check with them
wook of 2 July.
04
והבים
*
12/BR

