14-00000
104-10247-10119
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
18 January 1965
MEMORANDUM FOR THE BELGED
SUBJECT: AMWHIP Meeting, 14 January 1965, New York City
1. Meeting Time Place Purpose: The meeting was held
in the offices of AMWHIP 1 from 1100 to 1350 hours. The
purpose of the meeting was to procure additional information
on AMLASH 3 and to brief AMWHIP 1 regarding his role in the
meetings between AMLASH 1 and AMBIDDY 1 to be held in Europe
during January 1965.
2. Details of the Meeting: AMWHIP 1 was concerned
about his role from the meetings between AMLASH 1 and
AMBIDDY 1. He was first of all concerned about whether the
second meeting should even take place. The undersigned as-
sured AMWHIP 1 that not only was another meeting probably not only
necessary but highly desirable, in view of the many problems
and details which undoubtedly were left to be ironed out.
As agreed with R. Sanchez prior to this New York meeting, the
undersigned took the position with AMWHIP 1 that he was not
aware of the details of the original meeting and was inter-
ested in obtaining any information which was available to
AMWHIP 1. AMWHIP 1 stated that he himself did not know much
about the meeting's details as he had in fact left Europe be-
fore it took place. AMWHIP 1 is not convinced that KUBARK was
unaware of the details of this meeting and intimated as much
to the undersigned. We, however, maintained the fiction that
14-00000
3
we did not know and proceeded with discussions along that
line. AMWHIP 1 was also told that it would undoubtedly be
of considerable interest to us and to him to attend the
afore-mentioned January meeting between AMLASH and AMBIDDY.
AMWHIP 1 had informed us in an earlier telephone conver-
sation. (Memo for the Record, dated 12 Jan 65) that AMLASH
had specifically requested that he attend the meeting.
AMWHIP 1 in discussing the reason for his attendance, sug-
gested that perhaps AMLASH 1 wanted a trustworthy witness
to the conversations and also possibly to witness the signing
of written memoranda which might be prepared
by the two participating parties.
As sighted in Memo for the Record, dated 12 Jan 65,
AMWHIP 1 elaborated on his telephone conversation with AMLASH 1
who had called from Geneva on 12 Jan. AMLASH 1 had called
from AMWHIP 2's home to AMWHIP 1's office in NY. AMLASH 1
indicated that he desired another meeting with AMBIDDY prior
to his return to Cuba. However, after getting our concurrence for
this meeting, AMWHIP 1 informed us that he expected to contact
AMBIDDY 1 in Miami on the 15th of January during a stopover on
his (AMWHIP's) trip to Puerto Rico. AMWHIP 1 said he would either
see AMBIDDY personally, telephone him, or in any case make
contact with him through his Enrique Garcia, Garcia, former
member of the Bay of Pigs Brigade and presently manager or owner
of the Laundry Chantres, located on 8th Str., Miami (see
attachment for traces and for further identification of Garcia).
14-00000
3
AMWHIP 1 stated further that AMLASH had decided that he should
like to have the meeting in Rome and that it should take place
sometime before the end of January (since it is now known that
AMBIDDY intends to go to Europe during the first part of the
week of the 18th, its quite possible the meeting will take
place during the week of the 18th AMWHIP said that he would
not have an unlimited amount of time this time to be in Europe.
We said we understood this and told AMWHIP that "Nick" (N.
Sanchez) likewise could only devote 3 or 4 days to European
meetings. It was agreed, therefore, that for the best
utilization of both men's time, they should coordinate their
travels to Europe.
3. Silencer: AMWHIP opened this subject by saying that
he wanted to get something off his mind even though he was
aware that we were always reluctant to discuss this subject.
He stated that he would be able to get a silencer for a
"M-3 rifle" for $125.00. We suggested that he discuss this subject
for discussion between AMLASH and AMBIDDY. AMWHIP 1 stated
that he understood our position on this point. We then pro-
ceeded on the other subjects.
4. AMLASH 3: In response to a request from WH 'SA'CI
(Tansing) we brought up the subject of AMLASH 3. In summary,
AMWHIP did not have anything to add to his picture of AMLASH 3
that he has not already discussed previously with N. Sanchez.
However, for the record we will include a summary of our con-
versations concerning AMLASH 3, AMWHIP 1 stated he had known
14-00000
4
AMLASH 3 for many years, (since school days) but did not
consider him to be a close friend. He knew AMLASH 3's
family as he had sold jewelry to them from time to time
during the Batista era in Havana, AMWHIP 1 believed
AMLASH 3 had been associated with the University but had
not actually been a bonafied student. He knew nothing
else about AMLASH 3's educational background. AMLASH 3
had known AMLASH 1 for 10 or 12 years. It was the opinion
of AMWHIP 1 that AMLASH 3 was "100% loyal to AMLASH 1".
It further stated that aside from his rather strong interest
in liquor and attendant belligerency when drunk, AMLASH 3
was not open to corruption through financial inducement
or other material rewards. He stated that AMLASH 3 was al-
ready rather involved with and his plotting, and
AMLASH
having
acted as driver, the recent caching of arms by AMLASH 3
during
in
El Moro" Acef's warehouse outside Havana. (Acef according
to AMWHIP 1, AMLASH 3 has become extremely nervous as
result of his participation in the AMLASH planning and has, in
fact, recently resigned his position as Major of Marianao) He
wants to return to the study of medicine and to complete his
work for an M.D. degree. We pointed out to AMWHIP 1, and he
agreed with us, that such action would not particularly serve
to add any protection to (Acef's) position, but possibly would
merely call more attention to
We attempted to explore the details of AMLASH 3's re-
cruitment for subsequent dispatch to Spain by the DSI. AMWHIP
14-00000
5
stated that he had given this information to, he believed,
both "Nick" and to Growery in Europe. He knew the man who
had recruited Blanco in Cuba as being a notorious DSI
operator. He could not recall the name but stated he had
provided it before on a previous occasion. He did not
know any of the details of AMLASH 3's activation in Madrid
or of his contact with Luis Manuel CANTILLO. AMWHIP
said he was aware only of the fact that AMLASH 3 had
been in the company of "Luis Manuel". AMWHIP 1, however,
offered to elicit as much information as possible about the
AMLASH 3 CANTILLO relationship. He asked for a briefing or
a list of questions prior to his next meeting with AMLASH 3
in Europe.
In discussing the loyalties of AMLASH 3 and the re-
sultant security implications for the AMLASH operation,
AMWHIP stated (see above) that he was absolutely certain
that AMLASH 3 would never intentionally reveal any thing
to anyone which would jeopardize AMLASH 1. (Case Officer
Comment: In discussing Security ramifications of AMLASH 3's
knowledge of the AMLASH 1 AMBIDDY relationship, both in the
light of his DSI associations, it could be concluded that since
AMBIDDY is now tied closely to AMLASH 1, AMLASH 3 will also
protect AMBIDDY.)
During the discussion of AMLASH 3, AMWHIP 1 expressed
mild amazement over the fact that we continued to doubt A 3's
bonafides when AMLASH 1, who had been in the block, had
enough confidence in the man to include him from some of his
most compromising activities. To summarize our position to
14-00000
6
the matter as we discussed it at length with AMWHIP, we
pointed out that his assessment of AMLASH 3 was probably
correct, but that we must, in the interest of giving
AMLASH 1 maximum protection possible, we must take the
pessimistic view point with regard to all of AMLASH's
associates and to the constant checking and rechecking too of the
fact and plagire of the operation. (sin)
absolutely noob. AMWHIP 1 sounded not only satisfied
but even somewhat pleased with this approach and reiterated
his willingness to obtain whatever information was necessary
about AMLASH 3 or other associates of AMLASH 1.
5. AMWHIP 1 was leaving on the 15th for San
Juan, Puerto Rico and will return to N. Y. the evening of
the 18th or the morning of the 19th of January. He will
get in touch with "Nick" or the undersigned at that time
for further instructions.
6. The undersigned checked with N. Sanchez at HQ
to ascertain whether there was any further requirements
for AMWHIP or additional developments in the operation which
could be serviced in N. Y... There were none. The undersigned
returned to Washington, D. C. the evening of the 14th of Jan.
7. Security: There were no incidents of a security
nature to report during this meeting.
03