14-00000
104-10211-10002
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
14 May 1965
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, SR/CI
SUBJECT: 3-13 May Interrogation of NOSENKO
1. Although I have attended all nine (9) sessions in the current
phase of NOSENKO's interrogation, I as yet have been unable to determine
the reasons for the interrogation conduct and manner and the true purpose
of the phase itself.
2. As the interrogator noted in the beginning, he is to be concerned
only with "certain personal matters." The interrogation of NOSENKO along
such lines and NOSENKO's responses - neither have produced any change in
my opinion of NOSENKO nor have appeared to have opened up any new, useful
or valuable information to us.
3. Perhaps, from the psychologists' point of view, this interrogation
has been of some value; but, even if this is so, I cannot see it from a
review of his reports. These reports all contain basic errors arising from
the psychologist's lack of knowledge of Soviet reality and his lack of
experience with the true nature of Soviet man. The psychologist is not
prepared to properly deal with and evaluate NOSENKO because NOSENKO is:
first, a Russian; second, a Soviet; third, a Communist; and, in addition to
all of this, a highly trained intelligence agent.
4. NOSENKO is one of a kind. It is quite likely that the psychologist
never has experienced such a personality before. Then, with the wide
difference in their backgrounds and the psychologist's resulting inability
to understand NOSENKO's character, it is understandable that he cannot
properly judge NOSENKO and his conduct. The most we can manage to go on in
NOSENKO's case historically are the carefully considered opinions of those who
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
have backgrounds more similar to that of NOSENKO and experience with persons
of NOSENKO's type. This becomes more and more obvious to me as I hear the
psychologist say, "Well, he is probably telling the truth," when I have
seen clearly that NOSENKO has been lying. There have been many such cases in
this KGB's latest phase of the interrogation.
5. As a result of such instances - instances of "soft interrogation,"
where NOSENKO's obvious lies have not been challenged - NOSENKO can now only
be getting the impression that there still is a way out for him. We must
remember that NOSENKO came to us prepared only for complete success or
failure; he expected that in the case of failure he would be subjected to
very hard interrogation, harsh treatment, strong punishment. Yet he now
finds himself in the peculiar position of having outwardly failed in his
primary assignment, yet being fairly well treated and allowed to
continue with his lies and dezinformatsiya despite his detention. He can now
only be thinking that there still is some hope for him and for his mission.
6. In his report on the 3 May session (first session), the doctor
wrote: "...After apologizing for having stomach trouble he became more
receptive and even eager to cooperate. In general his manner during the
interview remained relaxed, spontaneous and relevant....As the interview
progressed it was apparent to me that he was getting considerable psychological
relief from the interview. At the time he left, he actually told me goodbye...."
This is typical of many such statements and incidents which are my reasons for
asking: do we really need this kind of interrogation?
From considering the report itself we must ask if we really need to concern
ourselves with giving NOSENKO "psychological relief." If not - and since it
is obvious we are getting nothing else out of it - then this type of
interrogation should be abandoned.
7. Elsewhere the psychologist writes that "the picture that NOSENKO
painted of his father was that of a hard working man....Accredited as a
worker at 13 or 14....He graduated from the institute the year after
NOSENKO was born in 1928. NOSENKO tells of being told that his father
would work at home on his studies while holding NOSENKO across his knees to
quiet him when he would cry." We knew all of this - except the fact that
NOSENKO held his son across his knees -- from the Soviet newspaper, Pravda,
3 August 1956; and what father has not held his crying child across his
knees to comfort him?
8. It is certain that NOSENKO or NOSENKO did have a father, and that
it is quite likely that this father held him across his knees. Yet this
does not answer the real question - is our NOSENKO's father Ivan Isidorovich
NOSENKO?
9. NOSENKO told us in this first session that his father studied in
the Rabfak and the institute while working full-time during the years 1923-28.
The doctor was quite impressed with NOSENKO's statements on this. Yet Pravda
(again on 3 August 1956, in NOSENKO's obituary) also mentioned the studies of
NOSENKO, Ivan Isidorovich, also/been working at the
time he was studying. Pravda would have mentioned this without fail, because
it was that much more to NOSENKO's credit. Further, the 3 August 1956 Pravda
clearly stated that after graduation from the institute, NOSENKO, I. I., was
sent to a ship-building plant.
10. In the same session, NOSENKO stated that at some point in 1922 his
father was admitted to the Party. Pravda (3 Aug 56) states that NOSENKO I. I. entered the
Party in 1925. According to NOSENKO his family moved to Leningrad early in 1934.
Pravda (3 Aug 56) states that they moved in 1935.
11. If NOSENKO does not remember what his father did - how he worked and
studied, when the family moved, when he was admitted to the CPSU - why does he
not say so? Why is he apparently guessing at these things? Also, why can't he
remember these things when he can remember being held across his father's knees?
12. The psychologist's report includes an assessment of NOSENKO's mother:
"An hypothesis that could be made based on the description of the mother, would
be that she would have difficulty adjusting away from Nikolayev where she had
been born and where she could depend on her mother." Of whom is this not true?
Who does not experience some difficulty in moving away from familiar neighborhoods
and friends? Do we really need this assessment of NOSENKO's mother's relations of
35 years ago? Do we need it badly enough to spend this much time and effort
getting it?
13. The psychologist's report continues: "...His (NOSENKO's) mother
continued to get support from her father, and they apparently lived better
(or beyond their means) in Leningrad." So what? Is the point that we should
thank NOSENKO's grandmother for helping NOSENKO grow and come to us? No.
If not, then again what is the point? Why do we need this?
14. It is my opinion that the type and line of questioning used
(present in this phase of NOSENKO's interrogation) should be abandoned;
we must drop this policy of letting NOSENKO ramble on freely and uninterruptedly
about the unimportant details of his youth. Instead, we should begin now
to press NOSENKO and question him in detail about such things as:
a. His father's life (we still cannot be certain that NOSENKO's
father was the I. I. NOSENKO); for example, NOSENKO's father's service in
GBM ( & what credit was given NOSENKO for this while he was working in State
Security); was it even mentioned in his file?);
b. His grandfather (external); for example, his arrest and death in
jail, the role this played when NOSENKO entered the KGB, the manner in which
it was recorded in NOSENKO's file, NOSENKO's questioning in Personnel (identi-
ties of Personnel employees included) about this; NOSENKO spoke with some
happiness and gratitude of the financial assistance given his family by the
grandfather - the KGB would have been most unhappy to learn of this.
15. If NOSENKO were really the person he claims to be he would have
spoken more precisely of his father's rank (rank given and date received).
According to Pravda, in 1944 NOSENKO's father got the rank of Engineer-Rear
Admiral. The real NOSENKO also should be able to tell us more
precisely of the decorations given his father. According to Pravda, he was
awarded three Orders of Lenin, Order of Nakhimov First Class, three Orders of
Red Banner (Labor), Order of Red Star, Order of "Medal of Honor (Znak Pochoty)."
16. Further, in order to be certain that we have the real NOSENKO, we
should question him in detail about his father's death and funeral, starting
with the illness and the doctors in attendance through the procession from the
Hall of Columns to the Kremlin wall. I do not wish to include such detailed
questions in this memo, but can produce them upon request,
especially those on the funeral procession, having twice been in such processions
myself.
17. According to Pravda (5 Aug 56), N. I. BOBROVNIKOV was a member of
the funeral commission and opened the funeral ceremony on Red Square. BOBROVNIKOV
at that time was Chairman of the Moscow City Council. During the 13 May 1965
interview, NOSENKO mentioned a girl friend, Marina, who once worked as secretary
to BOBROVNIKOV. If this was a true statement, then NOSENKO should be able
to tell us much about BOBROVNIKOV, furthermore, when talking about Marina,
NOSENKO should probably have also volunteered the information that "this was the
same BOBROVNIKOV who was on the commission for my father's funeral....."
18. 3 May 1965 Interview. Even now we are not certain of the date when
the NOSENKO family moved to Leningrad; NOSENKO says it was in 1934, but Pravda
reports the move as having been in 1935. It is possible to believe that
NOSENKO might have forgotten the date, but we must remember that he associates
the move with his level of schooling. That is, NOSENKO says that he moved from
the 6th class in Nikolayev in 1934, when he was 6 years old; he says that in
Leningrad he was in the first grade.
a. NOSENKO could recall none of his friends from Nikolayev. It is
possible to believe that NOSENKO might have forgotten these friends if he had
had no contact with them in later years. Yet NOSENKO himself says that he
had visited Nikolayev twice after the family had moved from there. Certainly he
must have met with some of those friends, and it is certain also that he
would remember those meetings.
b. Although he could remember none of his friends from Nikolayev,
it is interesting to note, he remembered very well that when his family moved
to Leningrad in 1934 they were met by his father with a "GAZ" automobile.
c. NOSENKO remembers also that while in Leningrad his family lived:
(1) Ploshchad' Stachek,
(2) Griboyedov Kanal, and
(3) 12 ulitsa Gorkogo. But NOSENKO could name
no friends or neighbors when he knew well while in Leningrad.
d. NOSENKO never mentions visiting former friends when visiting former
places of residence.
The psychologist may accept these "lapses of memory" as being
"just human," but I cannot.
19. 4 May Interview. During this interview, NOSENKO changed his story
slightly, saying that his family moved to Leningrad in March-April 1935,
where he started the first grade (in September 1935). NOSENKO could not,
however, describe the school or name even one of his teachers. When the
doctor insisted this time that NOSENKO name some friends, he gave the
nickname, "Shturn," but failed to give the boy's true name; he also
gave the name, Oleg XXX SAFRONOV. Even if we accept as a fact that NOSENKO
really cannot remember any of his friends from childhood, we cannot believe that he
also has completely forgotten about the naval school and the tekhnikum.
20. General. During these latest sessions, NOSENKO has been trying
very hard to put the record of his schooling in proper order. But in
view of what has been stated in the past, NOSENKO's errors and his present
errors, it must be said that he is finding it impossible and he is
not at all convincing. In my opinion everything he has told us about
this, starting from the 1941 period, has been a lie. It is possible that
he really was in Kuybyshev and Baku for one reason or another, but his
description of the circumstances and situations is unbelievable and
fits no Soviet pattern of life.
21. On 4 May NOSENKO said that while he attended the 585th High School
in Moscow, he had two friends - Vladimir KABANOV and Anatoly TIMAKOV. But
these were not friends who also lived on Serafimovich Street, nor were they
children of Soviet high officials, except SABUROV.
22. NOSENKO's description of his life on Serafimovich Street could
never convince me that he ever really lived there. Among the high officials
living on Serafimovich Street, NOSENKO mentioned SHVERNIK etc.
According to my knowledge, prior to WWII many other members of the
Soviet government also were living there (KAGANOVICH, etc.). If NOSENKO is
the person he claims to be he should be able freely to name and discuss many
persons among the first-ranking officials who lived on
Serafimovich Street, not just SHVERNIK (whose address, incidentally, already
has been published in The Secret World).
SECRET
24 May 1965
1. It is the intention of the undersigned to attend every session conducted
by the doctor in hope to gain something new and useful for our future
interrogations. During these sessions, I managed only to refresh my
memory of things NOSENKO had previously said. Nothing new or significant
developed during these sessions except for a few minor facts which have no
great value. It should be mentioned that many of the facts that NOSENKO
stated about his past life were more mixed up than the story he had
previously related.
2. It is not the intent of this paper to criticize the work which the
doctor has done because the sessions have already taken place and
the work is completed. My main objection to this type of interrogation
is that the doctor tried to maintain a neutral attitude and never
challenged any of NOSENKO's statements. It is my opinion that
the doctor made a mistake in the last session when he told NOSENKO "You are NOSENKO. This leads
NOSENKO to believe we accepted his life story and family background, and
it would be very hard to question him again on this subject. It is my
opinion that we did not have enough information to make a definite
conclusion that he is NOSENKO. What NOSENKO told us could be obtained
or learned by another person very well briefed on these matters. Much of
the information that NOSENKO gave to us about his parents is still not
convincing to make conclusions. Most of the questions during the recent
sessions were of a leading nature and NOSENKO's answers appeared to
be of the type that the doctor wanted.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
SECRET
In my opinion, NOSENKO did not say more about his father, and in many
instances less, than the newspaper Pravda said in 1956.
3. In the doctor's opinion, NOSENKO mentioned to us quite a few family
friends who were around the NOSENKO family and at the first look it is
convincing that he is NOSENKO. In my opinion, NOSENKO gave to us
only names who logically would be associated with NOSENKO or NOSENKO's
father, and nothing revealing about their activities or private lives.
Significantly, most of the information NOSENKO has given us is about
people who are either dead or no longer in authority. For example,
MALYSHEV, (former deputy chairman of the Council of Ministers, died);
VAKHTUSHEV, (died); SABUROV, (no longer a VIP); KABULOV, (shot); VIP; KABULOV (shot) etc.;
BULGANIN, (no longer VIP); KUZNETSOV, (shot); SHELEPIN, (died); and others.
4. He mentioned a few names who are VIPs now, but did not say anything
interesting about them. For example, he mentioned SHVERNIK who lives on
Serafimovich Street, a fact known to everyone, and the family friendship
with KOSYGIN. We know much more about KOSYGIN from PENKOVSKY.
Lately he mentioned Marshal ZHUKOV's daughter who he knew - we already
have a good picture of Marina ZHUKOVA from one of our employees as well as a good
description of ZHUKOV's apartment.
5. The only conclusion we can come to from the foregoing is that NOSENKO
has been allowed to say little or nothing about the lives of important
Soviet officials, or this man is not NOSENKO and all he knows is the
SECRET
legend which has been provided him or answers which he could figure
out himself.
6. With regard to his mother, he did not mention anything of importance to
us. He did not mention any of his mother's friends among Soviet VIPs, and
tried to avoid or change the subject when this matter was brought up.
7. I am not convinced that NOSENKO lived on Serafimovich and Granovsky
Streets because he gave so little information about these areas that
it is impossible to judge if he actually lived there. Although he
gave correct information about a few VIPs who lived in houses in that
area, other details are lacking which would confirm his residence there.
8. NOSENKO's latest information on his educational background is so
mixed up and he made so many mistakes regarding Soviet realities that it
is impossible to believe any part of his education.
9. I don't believe any part of NOSENKO's story about his military service,
"The Naval Preparatory School in Baku and Leningrad." According to Soviet
regulation, a person was usually called in the army when he is 19 (those
who have graduated from high school or otherwise have a higher education) can be called at age 18.
If NOSENKO was born on 30 October 1927, then he would be 18 years
old on 30 October 1945. He could be called into the army at this time, i.e.,
the fall of 1945, although he should have been 18 by September of that year.
Ordinarily, he would be called to service in 1946. In my opinion, everything
NOSENKO said about his military background in any kind of service school
prior to the fall of 1945 is a lie. NOSENKO then did not attend the Higher
Naval Schools in Leningrad and Baku because he was too young to attend these
schools and the schools only accepted students who were ready for regular
military service, and the lowest age for acceptance in these schools was
18 years. Then we still have unanswered questions on where, when, and how NOSENKO finished high
school. NOSENKO's story that he took some courses in Moscow Evening High
Sch. attached to Security Institute and his attendance at the Leningrad
Shipbuilding Technicum, I consider as a complete lie, because it does not
fit any pattern of Soviet reality.
10. It is my belief that NOSENKO probably never was in actual military
service and definitely did not take the military oath the way he described it,
i.e., that he took the oath at the age of 15 or 16 in Baku. It is not
necessary to do any research since an individual had to be 18 and on active duty in the service in order to be eligible to take
the military oath. If we believe that NOSENKO was admitted to the
Leningrad Higher Military Preparatory School in 1944 with 9 grades of
education, he would not be admitted to the school because of his age and
because he could not take the oath until October 1945.
11. During the last interrogation, there was some confusion on NOSENKO's
part about his military ranks. And now we have three different stories about
his ranks: Jr. Lt. - June 1947; Lt. - spring of 1951;
Sr. Lt. - end of 53 or early 54. He also has stated that he was promoted to
Lt. In his last interview, he stated that he was promoted to Sr Lt in April
or May 1953.
SECRET
Capt - July 1956
Major - Aug/Sept 1959
Lt Col - Nov 1963
He also states that he never was a major.
He said his promotion had to be approved by the Central Committee because of his
youth. These stories about his military ranks should not be taken
seriously and considered as a complete lie.
SOME POINTS FROM THE DOCTOR'S INTERVIEW
1. NOSENKO stated (7 May 1965) that he took the oath in Baku
in 1943 when he was 15 years old, but he did not remember how he enrolled
in the Baku school. In the same meeting, he stated that while he was in
the Baku school he was komandir otdeleniya. Also in the same interview he
stated that he was in the Moskovskiy Fletskiy Ekipazh. It should be said that
the Moskovskiy Fletskiy Ekipazh was only for naval personnel who were called
in the regular naval service. All of this should be considered as a lie.
2. On 10 May 1965, NOSENKO stated that somewhere he was arrested
when he was 16 years old and was put under house arrest. If this incident
really took place, it is more likely that papa helped him to
get out of the arrest or it is possible to think that after this arrest
for some crime unknown to us he was put in jail and then in a concentration or
labor camp. This is why NOSENKO tells us a story that in 1944, in the fall,
he was working for two or three months in the forest, where he got sick
and conditions were very bad. As NOSENKO described it, the conditions
were more like a labor camp than a regular military unit.
3. According to NOSENKO's latest story, he voluntarily went to
the naval preparatory school of Frunze in 1944 but he didn't start any
studies until November or December 1944 because the whole school was
working in the forest. Then in February or March 1945, the shooting
accident took place and he spent some time in the hospital and in May
he enrolled in a shipbuilding technicum. NOSENKO tried to make us
believe that while he was in the naval preparatory school he studied
10th grade subjects, but as we can see, in actual fact, he did not study
anything because he had no time. Later he stated that when he enrolled
in the shipbuilding technicum in May, the next month he graduated
and received his certificate as if he graduated from a high school,
and got the right to go to a higher institution. Only a crazy person
could believe this story.
4. During all the interrogations, we never got a clear picture
how he received his first passport in Leningrad and how he received his
first military ticket. If he really was mobilized and put in the reserve
it should take place somewhere later than October 1945 when he became
18 years old. Definitely there will be no talk about any military ticket
before you reach 18 years old. And more likely at that time he should have
been 19 years old to have been called into the service or posted to the
reserve. It should be noted here if NOSENKO really was in the naval
preparatory school in 1944 and 1945 and received his military ticket in
1945 then he definitely should be two years older than he claims.
SECRET
On 5 May, NOSENKO named several friends. He mentioned again SABUROV's
sons. One of them killed his wife (Valya Yefremova, the daughter of
deputy minister YEFREMOV). He killed her because he found her in bed with
another man. Deputy Minister V. V. YEFREMOV was deputy to NOSENKO's father.
He was at his funeral and delivered a speech in Red Square during the
funeral ceremony. It was noticeable that when we questioned
him about friends he always mentioned SABUROV. NOSENKO only mentioned
YEFREMOV by name and did not give any details. If NOSENKO is the person
he is supposed to be, he would have known much more about the
life and background of the deputy to his father. And here again we have
an example of a person who is no longer a VIP.
6. On 6 May NOSENKO told us stories about the eldest son of SABUROV who
married the daughter of the former Minister of Railroads KOVALEV. It
should be noted here that the full story of KOVALEV was published in my
book The Secret World. KOVALEV was punished and lost his VIP status in
1950.
7. On 21 May, in answering the doctor's questions about his first work in
the KGB, NOSENKO told us a story how he received an order to write a statement
to arrest a Soviet citizen who was connected with foreigners. (XXXXXX) The
Soviet citizen wrote a letter to the American Embassy. According to NOSENKO
he rejected this type of work although there was BERIYA's resolution for
arrest (Russian word is razmetat!). Further, NOSENKO explained that the
man was not guilty. The point of this story was to prove that he was working
in the KGB.
8. On 20 May NOSENKO once again mentioned that the working hours of the
KGB were from 10:30 in the morning until 1 o'clock in the morning, with a
SECRET
break between 5 and 8 in the evening. As I already said before Moscow Headquarters
until later July or August 1953 working hours were from 11 AM to 12 PM
with a break from 5 to 8 in the evening. In East KGB, including Moscow
city, working hours were from 10:30 in the morning to 1 o'clock in the
evening. Somewhere at the end of July and the beginning of August 1953,
working hours were changed and were from 9 AM to 6 PM with a lunch break
break of 1/2 to 1 hour taken between the hours of 1 PM to 3 PM for
all the offices of the KGB including headquarters and the oblast'.
Then it is possible to think that maybe somewhere in Moscow oblast',
Leningrad, or some other city, NOSENKO used to work as a case officer
or was closely connected with the oblast KGB. That is where he learned
working hours. That is why he made the mistake of regarding the working
hours in headquarters.
9. When the doctor is writing in the summary of NOSENKO's psychological
assessment he called him a bright sociopath. Maybe he is, but in my opinion
he is a very well trained agent with great ingenuity and excellent preparation.
I absolutely disagree with the doctor's statement that "He has been essentially
convincing and accurate in general if not always truthful in detail." In
one point it is possible to agree with the doctor that NOSENKO does not
present to us the complete legend. In my opinion, NOSENKO developed
his own story or legend himself in response to leading questions, especially
about his early life and schooling up to 1953. And from 1952-1953 and on, up
to his defection, we should believe that it was a legend developed for
NOSENKO by the KGB, of course, with his help.
SECRET
SUGGESTIONS
1. It is suggested that I participate in the next hostile, needling
interrogation. It would be helpful for me to have a disguise during the
next interrogation, although he will probably know who I am regardless
of any disguise I use. He also suggested that I interrogate him
alone in the interrogation room, although I prefer that screens be present
in the room. But if I am alone it will give me greater authority in
NOSENKO's eyes, and this may be a psychological factor working to my
benefit. But if NOSENKO is taken to another place, then it is possible to
interrogate him under KGB flag to represent myself as a member of KGB
who asked CIA authorities for a long time to talk to NOSENKO. In the
event of my participation in the interrogation to avoid mistakes and
misunderstandings, the interrogation should be held in Russian. It is not
possible to make the interrogation as hostile as it might be and to needle
him if the interrogation is held in English, as NOSENKO does not understand
strong words in English as well as he does in Russian. During the interrogation
I will not speak fast in order to make it understandable. It is understood
that I am going to be correct, but not polite. I would try to avoid getting
into any arguments with NOSENKO. In case of arguments, I would ask him to be seated
and to answer the questions. In the event he recognizes and tells me who I
am, it is possible to give two answers: 1. I am not he but he is coming soon
to talk to you, and you are mistaken. 2. Yes, I am D and you are going to
give me proof that you are B. You have to give me proof that you did work
for the KGB.
SECRET
In case of my participation, I would like to be able to use all the information
that NOSENKO has previously told us. In utilizing this information, I would
like to have a free hand to press in on certain points which I feel would
be of value to use in gaining a confession from him. I need permission to
use the names of Eagle, Big George, and Murphy, of course, only in the
proper way and when it is necessary. The use of the changes in the
Soviet government could be discussed having in mind those events
at the proper time when it is apparent that it will help him to confess
(the use of only the fall of KHRUSHCHEV without revealing the rise of
SHELEPIN and SEMICHASTNOV). It could be used in various ways, for example,
a newspaper on the mix table with only the headline showing. He could be
allowed to see the paper inadvertently and we could see what his reaction
is. Or, the information could be brought out at a point in the interrogation
when we are trying to stress that he must confess since we know he is
telling lies, and furthermore, his bosses are no longer in authority in the
Soviet Union and all is lost for him anyhow.
2. During the interrogation stress should constantly be given to the fact
that NOSENKO is being used as a tool of the KGB without proper training
of American realities, and that his mission was doomed from the start because
of this.
3. If it is decided to give him some drugs, it should be given prior to the
time of interrogation, so that we can use any of the information gained from
the use of these drugs against him. The first matter which should be first
determined if drugs are used is whether he is NOSENKO or not.
SECRET
4. I would not hesitate to continue the interrogations to the point where
perhaps NOSENKO would be extremely tired and more or less able to resist hostile
questioning. If there is not enough personnel for extended periods of
interrogation, then he should be left in the interrogation room during
breaks in the interrogation.
VULNERABLE AREAS TO BE EXPLOITED DURING THE NEXT INTERROGATION
1. Everything about NOSENKO's education starting from Leningrad elementary
school, move to Moscow, Moscow schooling, should be examined. And special
attention should be devoted to the schools he attended in September 1941,
Kubyshev, Baku, Moscow, Leningrad, and back to Moscow again. During the
interrogations of this period, we should challenge NOSENKO by the facts
that he could not be at any military school prior to the fall of 1945. Then
we do not believe his story. This interrogation should include detailed
questioning about his travel to Kubyshev, Baku, to find out where he
really was at that period. At the same time, NOSENKO should be questioned
about where his parents lived from October 1941 to 1942. Also he should
be questioned about his first passport which he is supposed to receive not
earlier than November 1943 and not later than the beginning of 1944.
The same can be said about his military ticket, i.e., when and how he
received his first military ticket, through what military commissariat,
because he could not receive his military ticket earlier than November 1945.
His story that he received his military ticket in the summer of 1945 is false.
What medical commission was he examined by before he got his active
military service prior to 1945 including any military schools because of his
age. He should have been called to active duty in the fall of 1945 or more
likely in 1946. If he was posted in active reserve in 1945 or 1946 then the
question is why he was not called into the army.
Together with this goes the question of NOSENKO's education in the
Institute of International Relations. The story he told us is
unbelievable. First he states that it was a four year course and that
he graduated in 1949 and later on he changed his story and said that it was
a five year course and that he graduated in 1950.
2. NOSENKO's first marriage was to TELEGIN's daughter and divorce. On this
subject, NOSENKO should be questioned about his registration of the
marriage, passports, what district was the marriage registered in, about
his apartments on the First Meshchanskaya Street, including his military
status at this time, what kind of military ticket he had, when it was
registered. More definite questions should be asked about the divorce
announcements in the newspapers and full procedure of the divorce including
the two court sessions (district and oblast courts). Alimony - the exact
amount of alimony, reminding to him that earlier he told us that he paid to
his first wife 160,000 rubles from his money which he earned serving in the
Far East. According to the latest NOSENKO statements he spent in the Far East
less than 20 months. If this is the case, then NOSENKO received more
than 5,000 rubles a month. To make during the 20 months the 160,000 rubles.
Even if NOSENKO was in the Far East and received there a double salary
as a Jr. Lt. in the first year of service in the GRU, he could not make more than
3,000 rubles a month (I gave here the highest possible salary for a junior
officer).
3. Both of the subjects mentioned above should be thoroughly investigated
along with the matter of where NOSENKO was living at that time, paying
special attention to Serafimovich, Granovsky and First Meshchanskaya
Streets, keeping in mind that these subjects will really show if he is
NOSENKO. If we do not get proper answers on the first two subjects,
if he continues to lie or give unsatisfactory answers, then in my
opinion it is not necessary to question him about his study in the
Institute of International Relations. If the answers are satisfactory or more
realistic then we would