14-00000
104-10172-10190
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
RE
Backg
Do
nly
ca
COPY (om SM files!
SUIRJECT: Biographical Highlights
!
!
1. Anstalty Mikhaylovich COLITSINS KLIMOV was born on
25 August 10 a: Firyatin, Poltaava, Oblast, Ukrainian SSR,
of lover sisss parents. After childhood education and studies
at the Frunze Artillery School in Odessa, where he was a
Komsomol (CP Youth) organizer, Subject requested and was
granted transfer into Military Counterintelligcace.
2. The following are highlights of the chronology of
Subject's fessional career:
1945-1946:
1946-1949:
1948-1950:
1950-1951:
Student at the one year course, Military
Counterintelligence School, CUKR/"SORSH,"
Moscow.
Desk officer, Assistant Opemtioral Case
Officer, assigned to the Eastern Section
(otdeleniye) of the SK (Soviet Colony -
security of Soviet officials abroad)
Department (ctiel) of the First Chief
(Foreign Intelligence) Directorate of MGB
Headquarters in Moscow. During the period
November 1947 to September 1948 Subject
held the title of Referent and his office
was designated the Firth (SK) Department
of the Third (Eastern) Directorate of the
KI (Committee for Information), but his
functions were unchanged.
Student at the two-year course, Higher
Intelligence School of the KI. Subject
studied general subjects and the English
language; he was one of 30 students who
specialized in counterintelligence during
the second year of the course.
Desk officer, Opemtional Case Officer,
supervising SK activities in China,
assigned to the X Section, Eastern Depart-
meat, First Directorate of the MCB Head-
quarters in Moscow, the SK functions having
reverted from the KI to the MG3 in 1949.
At his request Subject was transferred as
a desk of:feer to the Anglo-American Section,
Counterintelligence Department of the First
Directorate, 133 Headquarters in Moscow.
September 1951:
:
!
FBIWO
ON 3/17/98 dat
RELEASE IN FULL
RELEASE IN PART
TOTAL DENIAL
SECRET
REVIEWED BY FBVJFK TASK FORCE
ste
November 1951:
December 1951:
SECRET
Subject was promoted to "Sector Operational Case
Officer."
The MI was dissolved and former state security
elements were returned to the M. Subject's
functions continued the same, but, in the
reorganization, he was assigned to the CI Section
of the American Department of the Anglo-American
(First) Directorate of the First Chief Directorate
of the MOR.
i
March 1952:
September 1952:
March 1953:
October 1953:
Subject and a young friend wrote a joint letter
through the Central Committee of the CPSJ to
STALIN making suggestions for a fundamental
reorganization of Soviet foreign intelligence and
counterintelligence work.
While on vacation in the Georgian SSR Subject was
ordered to Moscow for a four hour meeting, with his
friend, with STALIN, MALEKOV, and ARIYA. STALIN
thanked the two officers for their suggestions,
discussed intelligence matters in detail and asked
then to send him a letter with specific proposals
for necessary reorganizations, together with the
names of recomended chiefs. In a subsequent
letter they recommended Sergey Ivanovich OCOLTSOV,
then in prison for "political crimes," and Yevgeniy
Petrovich PITO/PANOV, then chief or deputy chief
of the MCB in the Uzbekistan SSR. STALIN met subject
and his friend a second time. OGOLTSOV was released
from prica end appointed Chief of the First Chief
Directorate, with PITOVRANOV as his deputy. A
Chief Intelligence Directorate of the MGB was then
formed, containing a Counterintelligence Department
with an Eaigre desk and seven geographical
desks. Subject was appointed by COOLTSOV as chief
of the American Desk, supervising approximately
15 staff persons.
When STALIN died and BERIYA took over control of the
State Security apparatus, which he combined with the
MID into a unified MD, he replaced OLTSO vith one
of his own appointees. Subject was reassigned as
deputy chief of the Russian bigre Desk of the CI
Department of the Second (new designation for foreign
Intelligence) Chief Directorate, :f.D. Subject supervised
activities apinst agres in Austria and Germany.
Sablect was assigned to the M/D residency in Vienna,
Austria, as an operational case efter in the gre
Operations Croup.
-3-
SECRET
August 1954:
1955-1959:
September 1959:
April 1960:
August 1960:
15 December 1961:
Jubject was transferred to the British Sub-Groקנ of
the Anglo-American-French Group of the KG3 residency
in Vienna. His duties were of a counterintelligence
nature, 1.e. concerned with penetration of foreign
intelligence services.
One of 170 students attending the four year internal
security-counterintelligence course, the KG3 Higher
School Juridical Institute. He presented and success-
fully defended his thesis on the subject of SK
activities among Soviet delegations and tourist groups
traveling abroad. He received his diploma in August
1959. During his school tour Subject also spent several
weeks in on-the-job training as a student assigned to
pertinent elements of the KGB's Second (Internal
Counterintelligence) Chief Directorate, with access to
operational files on foreign diplomatic personnel in
Moscow who were KGB targets.
Subject was assigned as a Senior Operational Case
Officer responsible for NATO information within the
Treaty Organizations Direction, Information (Reports)
Department, First (Foreign) Chief, Directorate, KGB
Headquarters, Moscow. His function was to translate,
edit and sumarize in ormation reports obtained by KG3
agents abroad and to disseminate the pertinent
information to the Central Committee of the CPSU,
members of the Presidium, including KHRUSHCHEV, and,
in the case of information with military aspects, to
MALINOVSKIY, the Minister of Defense. At one time,
during a CP cell meeting, criticisa was voiced about
the delays in translation and processing and Subject
was assigned to study the situation. Thus he
examined registry logs showing the titles of agent
information reports, the place acquired, the date
received and the date of dissemination of the finished
Russian intelligence reports to the government.
Subject was transferred to the American Section of the
CI Department of the First Chief Directorate, KGB, to
prepare for assignment to the KGB residency under
Soviet Embassy cover in Helsinki, Finland, as the CI
officer working against foreign intelligence services.
Subject was assigned to the KGB residency in Helsinki,
under the name KL:0% (his true name was compromised
through the 1954 derection of Petr DERYABIN in Vienna),
and with the cover title of Third Secretary.
Subject, with his wife and young daughter defected to
the U.S. Government which granted then political
asylua.
-3-
SECRET
is Lecember 1961: Subject and his family (his wife Svetlana Mikhaylovna
GOLITSYNA nee CHERNOVALOVA, DPOB: 1 March 1929, Salsk,
Rostov, USSR, who he married on 23 August 1953 in the USSR,
and daughter Tatyana, born 22 June 1955) arrived "black" in
the Washington, D. C. area after travelling from Finland through
Sweden and Germany.
28 December 1961. Subject met Attorney General Robert KENNEDY along with
Early 1962-
February 1963:
Mr. HELMS.
Subject was debriefed by CIA Officers, officials from other US
Agencies and teams of Intelligence Officers from Free World
nations. Subject provided much valuable information on the KGB,
its organization, personnel, operations, aims and efforts
against the Free World. Subject, however, proved to be a most
difficult handling problem, especially as a result of his
personality and his constant demands for regular meetings with
high-leve! US officials such as the President, the Attorney-
General, the Directors of CIA and the FBI and for a policy
role in the US Intelligence Community.
16 February 1962: Subject had another meeting with the Attorney-General,
2 July 1962:
9 July 1962:
22ugust
ugust 1962:
Subject met again with the Attorney-General and Mr. HELMS.
Subject had conversation with Mr. HELMS.
Subject had interview with Mr. SORENSON and Mr. Edward R.
MURROW
15 November 1962: FBI source reported that KGB aware of Subject's presence in
the U. S. A. and ordered all Soviet IS personnel to report
immediately any information which they may obtain regarding
Subject.
Subject met the DCI and protested treatment by the Agency.
27 November 1962:
27 November 1962:
Subject was dissatisfied with his talk with the DCI and visited
the Attorney-General on his own unofficially.
14tember 1962: Subject met again with the DCI.
21 February 1963: Subject and his family leſt N. Y. C. on SS Sylwania for England.
il
Spring 1963:
Subject worked with the British.
the British.
8 August 1963:
Subject returned to the U.S. A.
22 August 1963:
Subiect met the Attorney-General again.
23 August 1963: Subject met the DCI again.
4 September 1963: Subject met the DCI again and stated that he wanted to become
an advisor to the DCI and the Intelligence Community.
October 1963-
April 1964:
Subject in contact with the Agency mostly in the N. Y. C. area.
Subject reasonably cooperative.
1964/1965:
Subject, according to a a Dutch official, visited the Netherlands.
June 1965:
Subject interviewed by the Canadians in the N. Y. C. area.
August 1968:
Subject in contact with the British regarding possible
publication of his book.
October 1968:
FBI source indicated that he had no current information
concerning the KGB attitude regarding Subject but the source
stated that if the KGB knew Subject's location it might undertake to
eliminate him.
July 1970:
Subject in contact with Agency personnel and visited Florida.
September 1970: U.S. Senate Internal Security Subcommittee interested in Subject
March 1972:
under name DOLNYTZIN.
CAESMASH reported that he kney that Subject had been
sentenced to death by the KGB. An article regarding this
sentence appeared in the Chekist sometime after 1964.
Subject in touch with CIA officials.
April 1972:
September 1972: AEGAIN provided a copy of the 1969 KGB Alphabetical List of
Agents of Foreign Intelligence Services, Defectors, Members of
Anti-Soviet Organizations, Members of Punitive Units and Other
Criminals under Search Warrents. In this List the KGB listed
Subject and his wife as under the sentence of death for revealing
Soviet State secrets.
Early 1974:
Subject and family living in N. Y. C. Area, he is writing and
conducting research. He is presently in contact with the Agency
and also with the French He has also visted South Africa and
worked with the South Africans in recent years.