1104-10071-10084
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Nat Reproduce
7 July 1972
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PECORD
03
SUBJECT: Jeffrey G. Peterson's Conversation with
Rolando Masferrer, Jr.
1. On Sunday, 2 July 1972, from 1800 to 2000 hours
at the Shanghai Restaurant, Arlington, Va., I met with
Rolando Masferrer, Jr. (Masferrer is unwitting of my Agency
employment. My cover story is that I am a Program Officer
with the State Department. I supposedly work in a research
capacity for the American Republics Area until the time I
can be programmed to enter the next Foreign Service Institute
class.)
2.
Masferrer and I, old National Guard comrades, had
not seen one another for 5 months. We had dinner and later
went on a tour of apartment sites in the District and northern
Virginia. During the course of the conversation, he related
the events of his trips to Mexico and his recent trip (June
1972) to Colombia in the course of his job as Vice-President,
Sales, Military Armament Corp.
i
Mexico: Subject mentioned the trouble the Mexican
Government is having with leftist guerrillas, n icularly in
two western states. He claimed the rebels were being trained
in part by U.S. adventurers who claimed to be ex-ranger, airborne,
Marine or Special Forces types, many with Vietnam experience.
The Americans were training the rebels in return for money and
marijuana and a piece of the drug smuggling action. The
Americans operated under the nom de guerre "Force Seven".
This same "Force Seven" claimed to have connections and affil-
iations in Guatemala. Subject claimed even to have participated
in a small firefight with the Mexican Army and the Judicial
Police against the guerrillas in an effort to prove the worth
of his particular military products.
VED BY 51-139/
NOTICE
SECRET
08721
TEXEMPT FROM GENERAL DECLASSIFICATION SCHEDULE
OF E0652 EXEMPTION CATEGORY:
58(1). (2)) (5) 17 (4) (chule one or more)
14-00000
SECRET
Colombia: Subject mentioned Colombia's increasing
alarm with the problems of drug trafficking within the country.
While ile in Colombia he claimed to have stayed sta in the house of
his family Lend MG Jaime DURAN Pombo, Chief of Staff of
the Colombian Army.
2. The entire conversation was kept on the level of
buddies swapping war stories. Subject, however, swore to
the veracity of his statements. I mentioned that the State
Department was currently interested in the problems of drug
trafficking in Latin America and maybe there would be some
interest in pursuing the matter further. I also indicated
I would ask my superiors at the State Department if they had
ever heard anything about the existence of a "Force Seven
or anything of the curious admixture of U.S. adventurers,
drug smuggling, and leftist guerrilla movements in Mexico.
3.
On Monday, 3 July 1972, I coordinated with the
following people at Headquarters:
03
7
Robert Brugger, Acting Desk Chief, Colombia
Richard Wheeler and John Murray, Branch 1, Mexico.
03 Robert. Weicha C/Mi/FI
Drake Reid W/NARC
Their collective suggestions and instructions were
a Go slow on efforts to elicit information so
not to arouse suspicions of Agency involvement.
Find out any information regarding the Colombian
Army's E battalion, U.S. citizen's involvement in drug
trafficking in Latin America (names, dates, and places), Cuban
involvement in cocaine traffic, and any ties between leftist
guerrillas and drug smuggling
C. Write a memorandum and Subject evaluation (where
he works, where he goes, who he meets, and an assessment of
recruitability).
2
SECRET
23887

