14-00000
104-10219-10120
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
PEOPANIAM PCR: CI/OPS/SovSat
EVIL.D
SECRET
27 October 1959
ATENTION
8
Mr. Miler
ROM
2
WE/1 - Granquist
1. On the afternoon of 28 Cotober 1959, Jane Roman waked me
whether we had any addresses for TIPAMA/1 in the United States.
She indicated that Hr. Fapich was interested in this and that the
FBI might want to consicer surveillance of T/1 in the U.S. at any
place where ne was known to us to be. One of the reasons for such
surveillance would be to check on the possibility of fraud on his
part.
2. The information which follows has been taken from the tapes
of the conversations between T/l and the Swedish Desk case officer.
If it is incomplete, it is nevertheless the best we can dos
a.
Some of the people whore T/1 axpects to see on the
West Coast during the approximate period 27 October te 5
or 6 November 1959 ares
Grace Blair (cousin), 1025 17th St., Santa Monica, Calif.
Vike Siman (friend), Sierra Madre, Calif.
Mrs. Alice P. Floyd (mother), O Blandy Avenue, Apt. $33, ".8.
Naval Orenance Tent Station, China Lake, Calif.
16:30 planned to spend a day at Death Valley, Calif., bul
did not know in advance where he would be stavine.
b.
Onor 6 November he will return to Washington and
contact us, probably staying at the Roger Smith Hotel. 'Notes
!! surveillance of hotel mirht pick up our case officer or
others in contact with him, hence would be undesirable.)
٢٠
After 9 November 1/1 will stay with his friend, Patrick
Corley, in New York City. Corley's address is not known to 118
at this time, but can be provided. The New York Metropolitan
Area Colechone directory lists only one Patrick Corley, an! he
at 24tr death Avenue. Bronx.
SECRE
14-00000
SECRET
3. With respect to the practicality or wisdom of surveillence,
de feel that the FBI decision should we made after due regard to the
considerations already made known to them in cormection with the
monitoring of the New York City phase of the operation. The pros
and cons would seen to be the sams. As for the possibility of fraud,
we are inclined to doubt that T/1 would be tempted in this direction.
He was told by his case officer that he must bo prepared to outline
to hie Soviet case officer in convincing fashion and in detail every
effort he makes to fulfill the requirements given nim. Furthermore,
on the tesis of past performance we believe he is truthful in what
he tells us as far as this operation is concerned. However, in the
opinion of the case officer, it is not unlike him in strictly
personal matters - occasionally to exaggerate if his own reputation
would be enhanced thereby. It is problematic whether this tendency
would ever extend to outright deceit.
h. In the interests of consistency, I thought this reply to
Yrs. Roman ought to be channeled through you.
5. We would appreciate hearing from the Burean what decision
they make regarding surveillance of T/1.
Distributions
Orig. & 1-CI/OPS/SovBat
1 - CI/LSA
3-HE/1

