14-00000
104-10179-10222
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
08
Personal telegram No. Jet
Copy of Secret -ni/Personal
06erer of Faharag to Colonial offic. 10.
O tron
Ve Arredite unnumbered telegram of Swe(which
plence number as Personal No. 2) to Colonial organic. 20
to shingtom).
०४
10
All eight persons appeared before an expatriate
magistrate today and pleaded guilty to of ences against
Immigration Act and against Firearms Act. Selletter
General outlined facts known to police. Accused were
representei by Solicitor James Liddell who urges or court
that accused were on Anguilla Cay because their vessel was
in distress. Magistrate seems to have accerted this story.
He fined each accused five pounds on charge under Firearms
Act and cautioned and discharged them on charge er
Immigration Act. He ordered that arms and ammunition and
explosives recovered by Royal Navy be condemned.
2.
०४
or...
Your telegram No. Personal 49 passing No. Fersonal
from Washington. Cubans have informed Commissioner of Police
that they are trying to make their vessel seaworthy but that
if it is not ready for sea by morning of June 5 they will
charter vessel locally. Their intention is to return to
Miami and leader of party has said he will go thence to
Costa Rica. A journey to Puerto Rico in any small vessel
from here would be hazardous particularly in passage round
eastern end of Cuban coast. We have no direct correxion
with Puerto Rico and if Cubans travelled by air-they would
have to go to Miami. I cannot dictate to them were they are
to go. Sole legal concern of local authorities is to see
that they leave Bahamas promptly. Failing that they would
be deported. Despite American request in your telegram 06.
sugrest that it would be most unwise for us to seek to
arrange any special assistence to get these men to Fuerto
Rico particularly after surprising leniency of magistrate
which of itself will certainly arouse adverse corsent from
Government of Cuba.
3.
Your paragraph 4 emquiring whether Manuele Ray was
arrested in party. Leader of party told Head of Seal
Branch privately that he was Ray but this was not admitted
by others. He was charged in name of Martinez and
although police think that he may well be Ray, I think
proper course is to treat him as being Martinez.
:
Am
10/RJ

