14-00000
104-10256-10277
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
a
Y
MASA
MEMORANDUM FOR:
SUBJECT
:
03
7 January 1975
O/DDO (Attn: Mr. (Burns))
German Magazine Attempts to Tie Howard Hunt/
Frank Sturgis to the Dallas Assassination of
President Kennedy
1. Recent publicity against CIA in the U.S. has stimu-
lated the German weekly Der Stern to intensify previous
efforts to tie Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis to the Dallas
assassination of President Kennedy 06 According to CASHAKER/1,
a cooperative senior editor of Stern, the magazine plans to
fly reporter Gerd Heidemann to Dallas about 9 January for
interviews. The reporter working on the story at Stern,
Frank Heigl, claims to be in touch with "dissident CIA
staffers who were forced out after Dallas." Heigl sup-
posedly picked up these contacts in Ankara and Frankfurt.
2.
In October 1974, Der Stern paid Dallas photographer
Jack Beers $1,000 for copies of pictures he had taken of
persons being led away by the police from the book deposi-
tory after the assassination of President Kennedy. The naga-
zine was attempting to identify Watergate defendants Howard
Hunt and Frank Sturgis with persons shown in the Dallas
photographs to build up a story implying Hunt (and by
inference CIA) involvement in the assassination. To buttress
this conjecture, the magazine hired Professor Rainer Knuss-
mann of the Anthropological Institute of the University of
Hamburg to do a "scientific" comparison of the Dallas photos
with stock shots of Hunt and Sturgis. His findings are that
there is a high probability that Hunt and Sturgis could be
identical with two persons shown in the Dallas snapshots
and that the matter should be pursued further. A summary
translation of the Knussmann findings is attached.
03
Wiliam W Philps Phifes
Gerard Gerard J. Hahn
Chief, E/G
Attachment:
As Stated, Herewith
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 057018
SECRET
14-00000
Officially Registered Court
Expert for Hereditary Biology
Prof. Dr. Rainer Knussmann
Examining Laboratory
Duesseldorf, Markenstr. 5
TRANSLATION
TO: The Editorial Board of the STERN
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
Frank P. Heigl
2 Hamburg 1
Pressehaus
Personnel Identification "Watergate" (Your reference
Number FPH/RAD)
Dear Herr Heigl:
I refer to our conversation of 29/10/74 and your written
assignment of 5/11/74 and set forth in the following the
principles of poly-symptomatic resemblance analysis based
on
ANTHROPOLOGICAL IDENTITY EVALUATION
whether the persons, Frank Stergis and Howard Hunt are
identical to persons shown in comparative photographs.
A.
Introduction
1. Material
With your letter of 5/11/74 a--total of 47
photographs in different formats and differing sharpness were
sent me. After telephone re-querying with Frau Radiziwill*
9 further photos were sent to me. I have designated the
back sides, lower left, of these 56 shots with green symbols
and with numbers where different snapshots were in question.
I added small letters in cases where different enlargements
of detail from the same snapshot were involved. In the
following report I will refer to these designations of the
photos.
:
(Comment: the total report is 37 pages, of
which only the introduction and conclusion
were provided.
The translation commences
with page 35)
*
Secretary at STERN.
14-00000
2-
d.
Conclusions
The given question about the identity of
Stergis and Hunt with the two designated persons on the
Death Site (DS) pictures can only be answered clearly to
the extent that a firm identity denial is not possible from
the photographic documentation placed at my disposal.
In
this connection there is a noticeable discrepancy in the
amount of protrusion of the ear in the photos of the man
who could be Hunt which, however, fails by far to be suf-
ficient for a sure negative identification.
In all, the resemblance analysis with
respect to both persons led to a clear majority of positive
resemblance factors, which above all for Stergis were in
part very convincing. Since it concerned a clearly estab-
lished similiarity in relatively rare distinguishing marks.
Because of the indifferent quality of the source photos
which handicaps a scientific comparison and because of
unsimiliarities which cropped up in the course of the
analysis--though these were nearly all of minor nature
--the total result is not adequate for the establishment
of an absolutely sure identity. Such a result from photo
materials such as were furnished me is in principle very
diffic.lt to achieve. The symptoms of identity neverthe-
less are so convincing that it must be advised in any case
that the material be pursued further. A successful identity
establishment could truly be expected if photos of Stergis
and Hunt, which should be obtainable, were prepared showing
the subjects from the same head angle and under similiar
lighting as in DS photos.
The probable identity from the resemblance analysis
is given a special weight because the margin of error is
significantly reduced when both Hunt and Stergis are
analyzed in combination. This is on the common sense ground
that while an accidental resemblance between Stergis or Hunt
on the one side and one of the persons shown in the DS pictures
would be understandable, there is a very narrow probability
that Stergis accidentally resembles one and Hunt accidentally
the other of both persons shown in the DS photos.
Possibly what is finally expected of me is a precise
probability quotient for the possible identity of Stergis and
Hunt with the questioned persons on the DS pictures.
Such
a numerical probability estimate can certainly be produced
by mathematics, but would show a false exactness. However,
to give a preliminary evaluation I estimate that the positive
resemblance between Stergis and the questioned person #1 in
14-00000
3
the DS photos has a probability of 0.1 (10% error, that is
90% for an identity). The similiar value for Hunt being
person #232 I estimate at 0.3 (that is 30% chance of error
and 70% probability of identity). From this a theoretical
error probability for the combined results figures at only
0.03 (that is 3%, therefore, 97% probability).
In closing I should like to assure you that in prepa-
ration of this evaluation I have taken pains to work according
to the best conscience and knowledge without any political
presumptions. I hope I have served you with my evaluation
and send you my sincere respects.
Professor Dr. R. Knussmann

