14-00000
104-10103-10356
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
29
BRITISH DESK
We attach
from FETCH
이
SECRET.
23
No: 8809
Date: 31 December 1974
이
FETCH
23
2
copies of note number
[6157
of 19 December 1974
Yours sincerely
06
Hasellu
хослонах об
pp. R. Murphy 66.
이
Koure: SMCINEMA/T
Source.
9/PJ
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
14-00000
23
NOTE NO 615 of 19 December 1974
C
NICOLE SZULC
1.
SZUIC left Havana for Madrid and London on 9 December,
flying by Air Cubana at the invitation of the Cuban Govern-
went who also said for her fare from Lina to Havana. she
was of course the guest of the Cubans during the month she
spent here; a car and a MILK "chaperone" wore at her
constant disposal. She was, however, far from being
embarrased by those attentions and evidently considered
them no more than her due since she was, in effect, working
for the Cubans themselves rather than on behalf of any
foreign nouspaper..
Che
2. I found SSULC inconsistent in her description of how
she had covered her tracks to make sure that her Cubs visit
would not come to the attention of the American authorities.
The first time we met she claimed that the arrangements for
her travel had been made in virtually clandestine conditions
with Cuban officials accredited to the Jil. She was anyway
going to Brazil and therefore selected the Lima-ilavana route
as her way into Juda; as she explained, the Cuban inmigration
authorities were briefed not to mark her passport.
hoped that by following a devious route out of Cuba she could
eventually arrive in the States without arousing suspicions
about where she had been in the previous two months. But,
slightly contradicting this apparent concern to conccal her
Cuba visit she admitted on another occasion that it was more
than probable that the CIA would rumble her and indeed, they
would know of her intention to come to Cuba since she had
openly requested permission to travel from the State Department.
Her application had been refused, which, while it aid not
surprise her, confirmed hor view that the American authorities.
were determined to victimise her because of her political
views: certain other cateories of Americans were being
allowed by the State Department to travel to Cuba.
It was eviient from SULC's own muddled and confused
..
:
3.
logic that she is motivated by a profound and almost
vitriolic hatred of, as she put it, the US Government and
its agencies. The repeatedly denigrated her US citizenship,
claining that it was the result of "an accident of birth".
She insisted that in every other respect except her birth
certificate she was Latin American (Brazilian) and not
American. Her references to her on mother seemed also
to be slihtly contemptuous; clearly hor strongest
attachment is to her father whom she described as the only
exception in "a family of fascists". The member of the
family who appeared to be her pet hate was a grandfather
resident in razil who worked for the Mercedes Benz company
and had some responsibility for the production of napalm.
To judge from the frequency with waich she discussed her
ther, I shold say ho has been the strongest influence
on her. They share much the same political viewpoint and
according to SULC it was her father's growing dislike of
the.....
14-00000
the New York Times' political position which persuaded
him to resign and follow his own bent as a freelance..
They both believed that a journalist should express his
own "personal" views instead of those of a particular
newspaper.
4.
The abuse and vituperation which SAIC poured out
against the Us seemed as illogical and ill-founded as her
unquestioning assumption that everything about the Cuban
systen represented the nearest that human society haä
come to Utopia. Her naive enthusiasm for what she was
shown in Cuba, and her dogmatic endorsement of it all,
excluded any possibility of her reaching an objective
assessment. Fr example, the coder Popular system
which she visited had fired her imagination ani she
refused to consider any of the more negative aspects which
might have implied criticism of the Cuban authorities..
You may care to note that she intends to publish an
article on Foder Fopular in Jarase magazine (I would
be interested to see a copy).
5. As you may know SCULC was divorced (or separated)
from Surart BISHOP in 1972 after only 2 years of marriage..
Her husband, she said, was a case for a psychoanalyst und
had necded a mother rather than a wife; ULO still seemed
to be confused and depressed over the marriage although I
understand that she had taken the decision to end it
herself. Her educational background, seems to have been
very varied; apart from the establishments montioned in
your traces she said she had attended the British school
In Rio de Janeiro (at which she picked up a phoney English
accent she can still assume) and Berkeley University.
:
:
6. I doubt whether the dividends from her visit were as
good as she had expected. At our first encounter in the
appartment of Olaudo REGIN she made extravagant cleiss
about her mission which she interpreted as being to assist
the Cubans in uncovering information on CIA intelligence
activity on the island and to ponetrate the foreign and
diplomatic community for this purpose. (It may seen-
remarkable that she should have been so indiscreet: but
I think the explanation lies primarily in her naivete
and ready assumption of a sympathetic audience, in a
desire to impress and a loquacity induced either by
alcohol or possibly by drugs of some kind.) It never
seemed to occur to her for a coment that in talking so
openly about the purpose of her visit she was in effect
blowing herself. However, unless she learned treater
discretion during the four weeks she was here it would
aprear unlikely that she came anywhere near realising her
intentions. when we met on 3 Decenber she told me
spontaneously (after several stiff rum collins') that
although she had at last succeeie. in making contact with
Cuban intelligence officers they were young and inexperienced
and were not at a nigh enough level for the discussions
:
/she.....
14-00000
she wished to have. She complained that she had spent
too much time with INREX officials who had no real idea
of the main purpose of the visit and it had taken about
two weeks to get through to a person with the appropriate
responsibilities. Now that she was in touch with this
individual she had asked for a meeting with Manuel
PIKEIRO. (I do not know whether she saw PINEIRO before
she left, but I think it is unlikely). Up to that point
SZULC had passed the Cubans "useful" material on Cla
operations (mainly in Latin America) but had received
very little in return. She was rather distressed by this
lack of reciprocity, pointing out to me that she was after
all on the Cubans' side and was offering them the
opportunity to embarrass the Americans ericuns by by publication-of publication of
denaging material. However, judging from her ouphoria
when I saw her vory briefly on 7 December she may perhaps
have received something further from the Cubans.
7. In any case, it seems she may have been loss active
on the intelligence front than she had expected and as far
as I know she had little or no contact with members of the
diplomatic conaunity. Much of her time was spent outside
Havına visiting the rovinces and in particular Matanzas
where she was allowed a detailed look at foder Popular.
8. SZULC intends to come back to Cuba in 1975 for the
first Congress of the Cuban Communist arty.

