5/N
14-00000
104-10179-10151
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
TO
1
RETURNTOO
Reproduce
Background Use Only
Do Not
SENDER WILL CHECK CLASSITION TOP AND BOTTOM
UNCLASSIFIED
CONFIDENTIAL
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
NAME AND ADDRESSDATE:
DC/TF/CA- Tilton
SECRET
INITIALS
GG 1908
AROS
ITON
3. BARS.
:
1 note Hent
is here now;
Copter you
FURTFS
03
BARUSON
RYAN
underlines reme
12. fortion) fe
Cooll Raymed.
03
Eren] 03 Hath to Hent
ligfore
03
4
S
6.
ACTION
APPROVAL
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
Remarka
Johni
DIRECT REPLY
DISPATCH
PREPARE REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
RETURN
INFORMATION SIGNATURE
here, at long last, is Winterrow's report
on his ta ka with Ray et al, also a letter
from Lunez. As I mentioned earlier, he will
be in tom next week (13-16 λας) and I will
question him as to the status of all this
sort of thing. Do you have any specifics (other
then the Draper circulation plan)
237
FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NOU
Remond, 3D 0117 x 7698
CONEIDENTAL
20-Aug
R
14-00000
OFIH-
66338
VISIT WITH MANJEL RAY AND CARLOS DIAGO IN PUERTO RICO
DURING THE FIRST WEEK OF JUKE, 1952
The purpose of this visit vas to discuss the possibility
of a Cuban information bulletin in line with the suggestion meda
some weeks earlier by Javier Fazos. This was also an opportunity
to discuss other activities upon which we might possibly collaborate,
I spoke with Ray for two or three hours following a day long
discussion with Diago. When I described for Ray the project of the
Cuban information bulletin as Diago and I conceived of it, he was
enthusiastic. It should be recalled that I had moved away from
Pasos's carlier conception of the bulletin and had cons to the
conclusion that such a bulletin would be most useful and unique
if it were based on material coming from inside Cube. In other
words, we would not wish morely to duplicate bulletins such as
"Truth about Cuba" which are prepared in exile and witten by exilos
with their own particular slant. We have a model for the kind of
bulletin I am discussing in our own koletin Informetive witch is
based on materials prepared entirely inside Spain. Both Diego and
Ray accepted enthusiastically this conception of the bulletin and
both assured me that a regular flow of information tren fasida Cuba
could be maintained, Diego apparently has a few sources of informat fon
who can send him material through diplomats traveling out of Gabe.
Ray has a much more extensive network through which he procures
a regular flow of information. Thas we agreed on the nature of the
bulletin.
The next question was that of sponsorship, since I do no
feel that the Congress should be directly involved in such an effort,
The two possibilities we discussed were the group around the magasine
POLITICA in Venesuela and the school in Costa Rica which trains
14-00000
OF PA
66378
democratic political cadres. Ray was very positive about the
school and thought that it would be a very good sponsor. He
spoke enthusiastically about the work being done there and feit
that this would be the most suitable place for the properation of
the bulletin. I told him that we would nova ahead along thaso
lines and see if we could interest the school in this proposition.
He, in turn, promised his full support for the project and agreed
to make available the information at his disposal on a regular
basis. The project for the bulletin is now in the hands of
Father Hunes at the Costa Rican school, I have sent him a detailed
outline of how we conceive of the bulletin, and have asked him to
discuss it with Baeza Flores during Bassa Flores's stay at the
school in July. Ideally, I would think that someone from the school
would want to meet with Carlos Diago and Fasto Haso who is
presently in Venezuela. These two young men would be the most
likely people to produce the kind of bulletin described above. It
might furthermore be useful to meet with Ray since he would be
producing most of the information used in the bulletin, at least
In the beginning. The question of where the bulletin should be
located was left open. But Mextendspondasoluuttuestion locating
it in Mexico City under the direction of Victor Alba might be a
useful way of proceeding. I continue to feel that it would best
be located at the school itself where the production of such a
bulletin could be fitted in to the regular curriculum of the school.
Bassa Flores will be discussing the project in Costa Rica and will
then pass by Puerto Rico in order to discuss the matter further
with Ray. By early September, we should know where we are on the
project,
With regard to a more general discussion with Ray,
would like to point out a saber of the things which he mentione
to me,
In the first place, be vas very ver his praise
14-00000
our Servicio de Prensa which he finds vary useful. Furthermore, he
offered his help in the distribution of the Draper book and of
CUADERFOS in Cuba. For this purpose, he suggested that we send
copies of CUADERNOS, a hundred per month, regularly to Rogelio
Cisneros who lives at 347 North Best 36th Street, Hient, Florida.
Cisneros would act under the instructions of Ray as the distributor
Кバー?
(? in Cuba for CUADERNOS and other materials which we would produce.
Ray also urged that we do whatever possible in the Dominican
Republic. He spoke of the many needs of the intellectuals there,
and of the role which the Congress could play. He has agreed to
send forward a list of names and adresses of people who should be
receiving our materials and with whom we should be in contact.
With regard to his own plans, he spoke of his intention
to start a 16-page newspaper in the near future. Furthermore, he
is making active efforts to start up a radio station. He bases
his activities on the belief that an uprising in Cuba is possible
if an alternative is offered to Fidel on the one hand, and the Niemi
exile group on the other. My general impression of Ray was a good
one. He struck me as a moderate, intelligent man, Alittle given
to hysteria and slogan-mongering. His best quality seems to be
his skill as an organiser. He did not strike me as someone with
great leadership potential, at least in terms of mass appeal. Be
did soen to be a practical and personally well-organized follow
with whoa one can work on a systematic basis. He spent most of
his time with as elaborating his convinction that an uprising in
→ Cuba to possible provided a (third) alternative is found. The
other point which he stressed was his sadness at the lack of
comprehension in the United States for his cause and the lack of
support for his movement. I en not in a position to assess how
mach of what ho said is accurate, but on the basis of these fou
hours of conversation wish him, I would tend to believe most of
what he told me.
(co- nay!
OF FIR
11338
In closing, I should say that most of our talk vas of a
limited and practical nature dealing primarily with the bulletin
project and with the various activities which he can undertake
....
14-00000
6633 P
with respect to the distribution of our materials. I did
discuss with him briefly the idea of ruming a symposiua da
CUADERNOS assessing the present state of the Cuba revolution,
ite probable development, and the steps which sust be taken
for the preparation of a nov program for Cuba's development.
Be personally believed that this would be a useful thing for
CUALERNOS to undertake, and at no time ceczed anxious to limit
the contributors to such a symposium to those people who were
members of his own particular group. Throughout our talks,
I found him free of those tendencies toward exclusiveness
which one encounters so often in exiled groups, and on every
question whether it concerns the bulletin or the symposiua
in CUADERNOS, or our possible work in the Dominican Republic,
he agreed that objectivity was the only basis upon which we
can workend that the open Bies approach was best. I found that
he was an easy men to get along with and one who makes an
impression of sincerity, forthrightness, determination, and
something much more intangible which I would call parsonel
cleanness. I intend to look in ways of working further with
hin in the future,

