14-00000
104-10181-10119
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Office Memorandum
SECRET
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
TO: Chief, Contact Division
ATTN: Support Branch (Crowley)
FROM: Chief, Miami Field Office
SUBJECT: Rand Development Corporation
REF: Grant-Gleichauf Telecon of 29 Apr 60
DATE: 4 May 1960
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
1. On 28 April 1960 I spent several hours with an old friend,
Dr. Robert M. Hosler, 10515 Carnegie Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio, who
had been a very good and cooperative source while I was in Cleveland.
Dr. Hosler is a close friend and next-door neighbor to Jim
of Rand Development Corporation (who needs no introduction).
2. During the course of conversation, Dr. Hosler told me that
within the last two-three months, FNU/Webster, the Rand employee
who defected in Moscow, had written several letters to his father
in the US stating that he wanted to come home. His father got in
touch with Rand, who told him to inform his son to go to the US Embassy.
The son replied that he was "not able to."
3. Being the impetuous type, Rand then decided that he would
get to the bottom of the matter, so he reached for the telephone and,
possibly to the surprise of all hands, was able to reach Webster,
who is currently in Leningrad. Webster did not go into detail but
said that he would be interested in coming back to the US.
4. At the time of Rand's closing out of his operations in Moscow,
he left his car in that city. Immediately following his telephone
conversation with Webster, Rand told his wife that he was going to
make his "last trip" to the USSR and would bring back his car.
Accompanying him on the trip will be Dan Moore, formerly of OSS, and co-
in-law of Drew Pearson. Moore is a resident of Cleveland and at
one time was affiliated with the Middle East Company. He was never
contacted by me because of his erratic nature, and because of his
marital connections. Moore is a flamboyant type who is willing to
try anything once or twice. The Middle East Company branch office
in Turkey was referred to as a US intelligence operation by the Soviets
several years ago, so they undoubtedly have a dossier on Moore.
Also accompanying Rand to Moscow will be our old friend George Bookbinder.
5. It was Dr. Hosler's firm conviction that Rand has some idea
in the back of his head whereby he will attempt to smuggle Webster
out of the USSR, during the course of bringing his car out of the area.
6. I have just received a letter from Dr. Hosler saying that
Rand, Moore, and Bookbinder will be leaving for the USSR on 4 May
1960. The purpose of this notification is to provide some warning
that an accident may be on its way to happen. You may use it in
any way you see fit, of course protecting our source.
7. Please use MI [MIMI 700.
JFG:cm
JUSTIN GLEICHAUF
cc: Chief, Detroit Field Office

