14-00000
104-10186-10428 2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
11
A-1 went to Mexico to talk to be about
sons of his work. He did not show up, but he was in Mexico from 14 to 23
Feb 1971. While there he met 2 persons from Nicaragua, professor Wand
and Fidel GERO, one in the lan embassy, one in a private house. One man
in Mexico is consul Alfredo MARSAL, chief of the center (is chatt), to 16
April, when he was replaced by Samuel VGA rorez. Commercial attache Ricardo
TALIA or CONCEPCIO: and Roelic are is.
For cover use mostly accommodation addresses and s/w but not too successful
because developers don't work; developed letters can't be read. Use radio,
2-way radio some used for normal transmissions back and forth, particularly to
Venez. Some radios only for emergency, such as attack on Cuba. Normally use s/w.
If an agent is to be sent to Latin America, Janeiro, Valdes, and Fidel would discuss
it; with Fidel's consent, orders would be issued and passports issued agent to go
out - this is pre or less permanent assignment under diplo cover. For TDI trips
like A-ls he gets a passport in a false name.
For trips to Socialist countries, travel laid on with Cuban embassy there. In
CSR there is a COR IS officer in the Cuban embassy who decides whether visa
will be granted. Falsified Cuban passports (in false name) plus legit passports
of Latin American countries, cedulas issued to trainees who came to Cuba for
/ trng. Most trainees come to Cuba ostensibly for /w trng and go back to
export the revolution at home. While being trained in Cuba, students are cased
by DCI desk officers and those good for use separated and trained for intell
missions without knowledge of other students or of their own country.
Mexican passport secured thru CP Salvador contact, sent to Cuba to be used for
someone who did not have docs or wanted another nationality.
Financial report on Nicaragua F1.
seen in Mexico:
2 Guats, one was advanced 120 to get to Guat
1 Honduran
2 Panamanian
3 Salvador, 2 more in Salvador
3 Mexico, one CR contact Mauricio de la SELVA, 2 Nicaraguans.
1 Nicar agent in Jaba
2 DR agents in prison in Santo Domingo
1 Haitian in Cuba
staff, Julio CAS. Vazquez Servicio
YO! Sosa, Hondurian, probably now in Costa Rica 1-1 thinks he was deported from
14-00000
-2-2
Honduras to Costa Rica: case called INTERNATIONAL CASE because each member of
family has different citizenship; he traveled with his family. Rosa was
trained as agent, radio, code, cipher, s/w, accommodation address
Julio DANAS Vazques handling RAICHEL CASS 5'5" husky, sometimes called
the Hawaiian because light mulatto; also trained in s/w codes, ciphers, radio,
also parachuting; trained for Central Amer assignment but still in Cuba.
Roque DALTON Garcia, Salvadoran, father was US citz and 3 brothers are, one fought
at China; sister Margarita Mexican citz now studying in Cuba. A-1 as case officer
gave DALTON 600 to buy radio receiver, but DALTON took a trip and lived high instead.
He has frequencies for radio transmission, supposedly second Monday each month.
Frequencies were files, file was rolled and put into false sole of his shoe.
Accommodation address of DALTON is Rafael ACEVEDO Flanco, Delgadillo 22, Colonia
Santo Tomas, Zone 17, Mexico, DF. Return addresses invented so as not traceable.
Agents in Cuba for intel or c/w training on departure receive 2 passports, one
Cuban to travel to Prague, one for return from Prague to own country. Agent left
Cuba once using own passports because not time for DCI to get them passports with
proper cachets. When passport for travel issued, DCI stamps in back cachet such
as from Orly Airport with date to correspond to period when agent was in Cuba.
DCI chooses countries for cachet use on basis whether man of agent nationality
would have to have a visa for the country. Most Latins can go to France without
a visa, so France is useful because no duplication or visa forging needed, only
cachet for Orly arrival. This shows apparently person was traveling in Europe while
actually being trained in Cuba.
Cuban passports with false names have 5 digits, stamped, hence recognizable. He uses
stamp with just 5 digits. Name in passport false, for that trip only.
Agent in trng assigned permanent pseudonym, which he would use again on a return
to Cuba. When DCI started, it sometimes assigned a trng pseudo, another pseudo
for second trip to Cuba, but it caused complications because of separate files,
so trng pseudo was made permanent.
Celicio DIARIO Gonzales, Nicar, is agent, now in Nicar, has access ad-
dress Isabel RODRICA, Pitagoras 16, Altos, Colonia Harvarte, Mexico, DF;
letter from accorre address failed to Cuban is.
IGA: requests for vaccination indicate IS interest; non is types who'd go to office
Cable signed Pablo indicates it from DCI Has.
Eulogio, 15 chief in Mexico Alfredo MIRADAL to 16 Apr 61.
V...A used - arcos cut will probably enhance it since A-l's defection.
14-00000
TAS 2-3
Letter concerning Salv revolution: DCI estimates, Cuban aid should be ca 25,000.
PIETRO IRO wrote on it: "See what their plans are. Where will they buy the arms?
What price? What connection with Mexico."
Fake passports: Photo replaced and false itinerary stamped.
Shortage of Latin passports for trainees leaving Cuba. DCI has to wait till
Mexico states can send some. When obtained, passport is prepared for travel
Habana-Prague, only way available. They go to another country.
Cables: in ani cut in Code. MIRADAL signs cables Eulogio, also uses Federico.
PINEIRO is known as I.
A-1 had 150 Salv pesos received at DCI from Mexico for Salvadoran leaving Cuba. He gets
dollars and Salv pesos. Manuel VEGA had Nicar desk before going to Mexico.
FLM Nicar finance doc explains misuse of money given GUERRERO to buy arms. Funds
came from DCI, sent from Cuba in suitcase sent by diplo pouch.

