14-00000
104-10210-100312023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
1
:
1
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECO
SUBJECT:
Anatole Re NOSENKO
7 April 1969
1.
31 March and 1 and 2 April 1969, Anatole was
consulted about the NOSENKO case as a fellow-up to the late
January 1969 meetings. He gave recommendations concerning
the procedures and topics to be covered during the begia-
ning phases of additional elicitation from NOSENKO which is
to begin soon.
2. To provide a basis for discussion certain papers
had been prepared for Anatole's review. (See Attachment A
for list.) These papers were basically questionnaires about
some of the unresolved or questionable aspects of the
NOSENKO case based largely on the central themes Anatole
had highlighted on 17 January 1969 when he commented after
reviewing the October 1957-December 1968 interviews of
NOSENKO. (See transcripts KY 1, 2, 3 and 4.) Other papers
concerned topics related to the NOSENKO case, nemoranda
NOSENKO had written, summaries and questionnaires prepared
from both collateral information and NOSENKO's information
14-00000
2 -
(
and summaries and questionnaires prepared exclusively on
the basis of information obtained from NOSENKO during the
1967-68 interview period. Each of these papers was read by
Anatole. Anatole's comment, our discussion, or any comment
is detailed in Attachment B, which sets forth crucial ques-
tions in the NOSENKO case.
3. Anatole was told The Director had decided that the
question of NOSENKO's bona fides had not been resolved and
had directed that additional elicitation and questioning of
NOSENKO would be undertaken immediately and expeditiously
pursued. It was understood, of course, as Anatole knew,
that he was to make a major contribution to the questioning
of NOSENKO and that information to this end would be made
available to him: there will be the closest coordination
with him, including a timely review of future transcripts
based on the new elicitation phase. It was understood his
views, comments and recommendations will be transmitted and
seriously considered if not explicitly implemented. Anatole
emphasized the need for him to review in advance all topics,
if not in all cases the specific questions, to be discussed
with NOSENKO after the new elicitation phase begins. He
understands the new elicitation phase will begin with Attach-
ment C and that there will be no additional topics discussed
f
:
SECRET
:
L
14-00000
- 3
with NOSENKO until after Anatole has an opportunity to
review them and comment.
4. The following summary points emerged during the
course of our discussions as things which must be considered
in the NOSENKO case information and as papers or question-
naires are outlined and topics selected for further elicita-
tion from NOSENKO:
noce
a. NOSENKO, as I understand the situation, has
had full access to newspapers, magazines, radio and TV since
approximately August 1968. Anatole was told I have no
knowledge of the periodicals or books he has read.
b. NOSENKO has recently been afforded a controlled
break from isolation and an opportunity to have feminine
companionship.
c.
Since December 1968 the FBI has been inter-
viewing NOSENKO about topics previously discussed as well as
other matters of interest to the FBI which do not originate
with NOSENKO. Anatole noted that FBI access to NOSENKO must
be controlled according to the new elicitation procedures.
d. That it is my opinion only that NOSENKO may
think he is entering into or close to entering into a new
relationship with the Agency on the basis that he has
SECRET
د
14-00000
SECRE
4
(
satisfactorily answered all questions during the period
1967-68.
e. That it has not been possible and it may never
be possible to isolate or pinpoint either the exact informa-
tion or the point in time when NOSENKO was given new infor-
mation or additional information which might be relevant
upon analysis to the question of his bona fides or his mission.
f. To date there has been a concentration on pre-
paring elicitation questions on the basis of information
obtained during 1967-68 period because (a) this is the infor-
mation Anatole has reviewed, and (b) this information has been
considered to be the standard for assessing NOSENKO and his
information and arriving at conclusions, since these inter-
views were designed to elicit information which would help
resolve discrepancies apparent in his previous statements,
and (c) at this time this information is better organized
and in contrast to information from 1962, 1964, etc., is
retrievable as an accurate or literal NOSENKO statement.
g. That the summaries and questionnaires prepared
to date may not include every comment or statement NOSENKO
has made during the 1967-68 period because it has not yet
been possible to isolate, by indexing and extraction, every
SECRET
Σ
14-00000
- 5
:
reference to a person or a topic. Anatole was told that
the sorting or isolation process has been completed only
through Memorandum N-188, from a total of approximately 260
memoranda. It was emphasized that most topics and persons
were discussed with NOSENKO several times at varying intervals,
and that the majority of topics were not covered to completion
in one or two interviews. NOSENKO also wrote memoranda on
topics which may not have been covered during interview or
which may relate to interview topics but which have not yet
been correlated with the interviews.
h. That research and analysis on most topics is
incomplete, both with respect to collateral information and
previous statements from NOSENKO.
i. That, as Anatole knows, there is certain collateral
or related information such as information from the FBI con-
cerning NOSENKO which has not been made available to him.
Anatole realizes this type of information may be vital to any
consideration of the NOSENKO case and he also points out the
possible if not probable relationship between FBI information
and sources and the problem of penetration of American intel-
ligence and Soviet disinformation. He hopes the FBI will
agree to release pertinent information to him and discuss
SECRET
14-00000
SRCKET
-6-
sources in the near future. He realizes any analysis or
assessment of the NOSENKO case will suffer to the extent
information is withheld from him. Anatole understands the
problem even though he obviously does not accept it as
logical or helpful. He stresses the need for us to press
the FBI to make appropriate information available to him.
j. That information we are dealing with in the
transcripts of the 1967-68 NOSENKO interviews is not neces-
sarily information previously known to or discussed with
NOSENKO and that, for instance, the body of information re-
sulting from the 1967-68 information has been expanded con-
siderably by NOSENKO's review of hundreds of names and
photographs provided him. It was also noted that it has not
yet been possible to isolate topics new to NOSENKO about
which he was asked to comment during this period. Neither
have we been able to isolate or determine when in the past
new, topics or questions of possible significance were intro-
duced to NOSENKO.
4.
We discussed in detail Anatole's recommendations
and evolved an initial selection of Crucial Questions (Attach-
ment B) and from these the first topics and/or questions to
begin in the new elicitation phase with NOSENKO (Attachment C).
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
-7-
Anatole expects to review and comment and to frame additional
questions after he reviews the transcripts of the first
elicitations. He has requested and expects, as this can be
accomplished, to review and comment about a summary of each
Crucial Question. The summary is to set forth both collateral
and NOSENKO information and detail, with attachments if neces-
sary, exactly what NOSENKO has said. Also, pertinent photo-
graphs and appropriate other documentation is to be attached
for comment or verification of identity by Anatole. Anatole
insists that he review and assist in the framing of all ques-
tions to be asked of NOSENKO and he states that he will
stipulate the order of questioning by both topic and specific
question where appropriate. He will specify or indicate areas
as set forth in Attachment C where questioning may proceed
without his detailed guidance but he expects to be consulted
about each topic. He plans to carefully tailor the elicitation
approach and, more importantly, to set down detailed guidelines
to follow when the elicitation or questioning becomes more
direct and concerned with those subjects considered, now or
later as revised, Crucial Questions. Anatole foresees a period
of relatively bland elicitation which will be followed by a
gradual sharpening of questions to the point where there will
be a confrontation or hostile interrogation. He also foresees
SECRET
14-00000
-8-
another polygraph examination either before or after the
period of confrontation. The method or approach to the
elicitation from NOSENKO is elaborated in Attachment C.
Anatole's recommendations about confrontation tactics will
follow after the results of the elicitation phase have been
analyzed. During the period NOSENKO is being asked to com-
ment initially, work on additional elicitation topics will
continue.
5. Anatole continues to express his concern about the
problem of an Agency penetration and his absolute belief
that there is a continuing need to strictly compartment as
many aspects of our research as possible and to restrict
knowledge about our continuing efforts and particularly the
details to get to the bottom of the NOSENKO case. He
emphasizes the need to severely limit dissemination of the
results of the elicitation from NOSENKO although he under-
stands it will be necessary to provide the results to the
FBI. He is concerned about the dissemination of his KY tapes
and the possible implications since he now believes he may
have erred in outlining too many areas of concern in the
context of considering NOSENKO's bona fides. Anatole was
told the KY tapes have not yet been made available to the
SECRET
14-00000
SECKE
- 9
FBI but that, of course, he would be advised about any
proposal or decision to disseminate them.
6. In relation to the point about Anatole's concern
about knowledge of his information I told Anatole that it
would be necessary for him to comment in detail in the
future as he had recently on certain items. He was told
that, as he knew, we are at a stage in the NOSENKO case
where details such as the organizational assignments of
individuals and identifications and the number of leads
provided were tending to obscure the Crucial Questions
and divert our attention from the central problem of why
NOSENKO would have been dispatched. I told Anatole quite
frankly there was a feeling he had not been fully cooperative
on the NOSENKO case. There was a belief that he should
furnish the details of his knowledge about individuals,
operations, the KGB, etc., so that others can try to judge
the accuracy or inaccuracy of NOSENKO's information.
Anatole was told that it would come as no surprise to him to
learn that the fact he has not told everything he knows is
still a problem and that there may be some misunderstandings
since it is obvious his detailed knowledge has had and will
have a direct bearing on the NOSENKO case. Anatole firmly
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
- 10 -
but amicably reaffirmed his position concerning cooperation
on the NOSENKO case. He said (a) it was obvious that
research to date and collateral information supports his
position that NOSENKO is a dispatched agent; (b) that he
will continue to cooperate fully as he has when there has
been an exchange of information; (c) that he would not give
details now because to do so would result in a situation
where it is "Anatole against NOSENKO" and it is obvious that
more evidence than this is required for an objective conclusion
about NOSENKO; (d) that details will follow after research is
analyzed or during the process of analysis as we examine
information and the details are pertinent; (e) that it is
unnecessary for him at this time to give additional details
about personnel or the KGB organization except when these
details reflect on major items overall these details are
not crucial and there is nothing to gain by considering small
items and details. If, however, small details become a major
point such as in connection with KOVSHUK, CHURANOV, GUK and
GRYAZNOV then during the review he will pinpoint the specific
and detailed contradictions. He reiterated his previous com-
ments pointed to the waste of time and diversion involved in
pursuing details and leads to recruitments or persons of
interest to the KGB when there is nothing crucial or significant
involved.
14-00000
SECRET
- 11
7. It was agreed I would meet with Anatole when the
first elicitation results are ready or when additional
pertinent research has been completed and there are papers
or ideas to discuss.
N. SCOTT MILER
DC/CI/SIG
14-00000
SOCKE
ANATOLE Re NOSENKO
CRUCIAL QUESTIONS
ATTACHMENT B
A. ANATOLE was consulted 31 March and 1 and 2 April 1969
concerning his recommendations on how to proceed to clicit
additional information from NOSENKO. ANATOLE offered specific.
topics and questions about which NOSENKO is to be questioned
after setting forth items or topics which ANATOLE considers
the CRUCIAL QUESTIONS which need explanation or resolution.
These CRUCIAL QUESTIONS are set forth below with comment or
notations which emerged during our discussions.
B. ANATOLE understands that the immediate period of
elicitation from NOSENKO is part of the program to attempt to
resolve the bona fides of NOSENKO. Ile understands that his
participation and contribution is actually the implementation
of the program he originally believed was to be followed
before there were any conclusions about NOSENKO's bona fides.
ANATOLE had been reviewing his file material and the transcripts
of his comments in January 1969 (The KY transcripts) so he
was prepared to discuss aspects of the CRUCIAL QUESTIONS as
well as specific elicitation topics. As our contribution to
the discussion with ANATOLE we had prepared 26 papers relating
specifically to NOSENKO and I had notes concerning other points
or topics to be discussed. Each paper was read by ANATOLE, he
مترجم
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
retained certain of the papers and, as set forth below, he
commented about certain of the papers or related matters.
After outlining the CRUCIAL QUESTIONS we worked out an elici-
tation guide to be followed with NOSENKO as the beginning of
the program. The clicitation guide is detailed separately.
C. ANATOLE submits the following as his recommendation
about how to proceed with NOSENKO:
"
1. Isolate the CRUCIAL QUESTIONS for our guidance
and consideration. (We basically accomplished this 31 March
and 1 and 2 April although obviously these may be revised)
2. Devise questions for elicitation. The questioning
of NOSENKO is to begin inmediately and is to follow the pro-
cedures set forth separately. (The initial phase of this was
accomplished. Additional or revised elicitation topics or
questions will be considered when the results of the first
elicitation phase are reviewed with ANATOLE).
3. A polygraph examination. (ANATOLE believes another
polygraph based on questions he will help frame will be essential.
It is his opinion that it will be possible to make the polygraph
meaningful if questions are based on a careful review of the
results of the clicitation and specifically on the basis of
his knowledge. ANATOLE believes it should be possible to use
the polygraph effectively and to eliminate or explain more
adequately the qualifications concerning NOSENKO's veracity
14-00000
SECRE
-3-
such as "substantially truthful" by pinpointing questions
and areas where there remains doubt. ANATOLE agreed there
might be a question of when a polygraph examination should
be adainistered since it might be more effective after the
confrontation or hostile interrogation of KOSENKO.)
4. A hostilo/confrontation interrogation phase at
which time NOSENKO would be faced with the errors, incon-
sistencies, falsehoods, etc. in his story and advised that
his mission failed. This phase of the approach to NOSENKO
would only be undertaken upon conclusion of the clicitation
phase or if or when NOSENKO's attitude changes during the
elicitation phase. The confrontation would be undertaken
only when full research on every aspect of each CRUCIAL
QUESTION has been completed and specific questions are
framed with ANATOLE on the basis of NOSENKO's information or
answers and all collateral information. In this connection
ANATOLE expects continuing research on each crucial question
so that each can be examined on the basis of a summary of all
information about the question, the details of what NOSENKO
has said and related or collateral information such as
photographs or documents, etc. The hostile interrogation phase
ANATOLE anticipates will be undertaken only after full consid-
eration of all possible problems. For example ANATOLE stresses
he will need to review the Bagley letter of November 1966 to
NOSENKO since this will be a key element in considering how to
proceed with the confrontation as well as to attempt to determine
14-00000
SECRET
-4-
what influence that letter has had on HOSENKO during the 67-68
intervious.
D. It was necessary to emphasize to ANATOLE the fact
that at this time it is not possible for me to assure hia that
everything NOSENKO has said on any topic has been recovorod
or is retrievable even for the interview period of 1967-1963
(and 69). Hoting the papers we had prepared ANATOLE had to
be told there was no assurance that everything NOSENKO has
said was included or considered when attempting to extract
or summarize his statements about a person or event. Specif-
ically it was noted that with a few exceptions no topic or
item is fully covered during one or two interviows. Even
though ANATOLE recognized the problem based on his review of
the transcripts of the 1967-68 interviews it was necessary
to emphasize the fact that the validity of any given question
we had framed wight be challenged, reversed or modified as the
process of indexing the transcripts continued. ANATOLE was
told that as of 31 March 1969 we had been able to index and
extract the transcripts and memoranda of the 1967-68 interviews.
only through N-188 of approximately 260 N-memoranda. ANATOLE
also was told it is not possible to be certain that all previous
information from NOSENKO can be accurately and fully recovered.
For this reason it is difficult if not inpossible to isolate
what he night have said in 1964 and/or 1965 and compare that
SECRET
-5-
statement with what he said in 1968. ANATOLE also acknowledged
noting the possible significance of the interview techniques
as these have varied over the years. Contrast in the technique
and the approach to NOSENKO where, for example, ho is provided
information or asked only to confira a leading question has
tended to dilute if not obscure what NOSENKO actually has
had to say about many subjects; at this stage it may be
virtually inpossible to distinguish HOSENKO's original infor-
mation from subsequent statements modified as a result of
questioning. This problem is an important consideration
bocause the approach to the elicitation phase was developed
with this in mind. Essentially it was agreed with ANATOLE
that despite previous statements or information from NOSENKO
the elicitation phase would be nanaged to attempt to obtain
from NOSENXO everything he has to offer or say about each
CRUCIAL QUESTION at this time without reference to any previous
statement. It is ANATOLE's opinion that if NOSENKO provides
a full statement without prompting that further questioning
can bo meaningful after analysis of his statement despite
the possibility NOSENKO has modified or revised his information
as he has learned or apparently learned what he thinks is
wanted or he should say. ANATOLE believes the fundamental
problem remains and that despite HOSENKO's twists and turns
it will be possible to sort through the various stories to
focus on the reason for NOSENKO's dispatch and determine the
SECRET
-6-
key iteas of diversion.
E. In reply to ANATOLE's question he was told that the
FBI continued to interview NOSENKO usually with Mr. Solie
present but that I did not know in advance anything about the
topics of any interviews: I told ANATOLE it was my opinion
that once clicitation from NOSENKO began on the basis of his
recommendations that other interviews would stop.
recognized and agreed that there might be a tactical and/or
psychological problem with NOSENKO by shifting the interview
technique to clicitation rather than consultation and a
response to questioning. ANATOLE could not emphasize too
strongly the need to let NOSENKO respond fully with minimal
prodding or stimulation and without refreshing his memory.
ANATOLE was told it was my understanding the elicitation
phase would be conducted by Mr. Solie without FBI partici-
pation although I did tell ANATOLE that the elicitation trans-
cript results would undoubtedly be given to the FBI just as
have the results of all the 1967-69 interviews.
F. ANATOLE expects and recommends that the period of
elicitation will be followed by the period of interrogation
or confrontation to be conducted by a tean of three persons
The security expert, Hr. Solic; a counterintelligence specialist
who knows related cases and CI problems, and a Soviet specialist.
SECRET
-7-
ANATOLE says this team approach will be necessary to implement
a fast moving interrogation, based on the script he will help
devise, which will not permit NOSENKO time to reflect or
think about his answers. The tactic will be to insist on
innediate and full answers and ANATOLE insists that once the
new elicitation phase begins HOSENKO not be permitted to
write any answers: He is not to be given any written assign-
ments: every response and reply is to be oral and transcribed
and NOSENKO must be encouraged and permitted to respond fully:
he is not to be asked to confira or deny any statement nor is
he to be assisted in replying to any question with suggestions
or reminders.
G. ANATOLE recognizes the problem of information froa
FBI sources and the release of this information to him. He
respects the FBI need to protect its sources and understands
the FBI attitude even though he quite obviously disagrees. He
believes that our failure to make relevant information available
to him is shortsighted and lessens both his effectiveness and.
cur ability to decipher the NOSENKO puzzle faster. ANATOLE
recalls that at the time NOSENKO defected in 1964 and there
was discussion with the FBI about the SASHA lead and related
matters he asked for FBI file and source information pertinent
to the problems. ANATOLE continues to believe there probably
SECRET
-8-
is a serious question about the possible significance of
NOSENKO to penetratin of the FBI and the bona fides of FBI
sources in terms of misinformation (disinformation) in
relation to both NOSENKO and other information. lie is of
the opinion that a FBI source(s) probably came to the FDI
after his defection and perhaps after NOSE KO's contact if
not dispatch in 1964. He suggests the possibility there may
be a false arrest and show trial of a FBI source in order to
further bolster NOSENKO's story. Although it has not been
possible to discuss this aspect of the NOSENKO story with
ANATOLE it seems clear that if we are to gain full measure
from ANATOLE it will be necessary for the FBI to approve
or conduct a briefing of ANATOLE appropriate to puting a
porspective on the FBI sources so he can assess what they
have said about NOSENKO and COLITZΥΝ.
H. The following are the CRUCIAL CUESTIONS which are to
form the basis for elicitation from NOSENKO. They are set
forth in the order discussed.
1. Misinformation in the Second Chief Directorate (SCD)
(This is an immediate topic for elicitation as set forth separately)
2. Leadership of the KGB
3. Leadership of the First Chief Directorate (FCD)
4. Leadership of the SCD
5. SHELEPIN's 1959 Report (This topic will be discussed
SECRET
-9-
more thoroughly with ANATOLE before the question is raised
with NOSENKO again. ANATOLE was emphatic in stating that it
had been a mistake to raise the subject of the KGB policy and
1959 reorganization with NOSENKO. He read the paper with
attachments but deferred comment except to note that NOSENKO
had said very little of significance. It was at this time
that ANATOLE first noted it was a mistake to permit NOSENKO
to write memoranda. ANATOLE obviously considers this aspect
of the NOSENKO case most important and a topic which requires
his study particularly in view of the fact ho now has extracts
from the GOLENIENSKI letters which relate to the 1959 KGB
reorganization and disinformation. ANATOLE also did not recall
the book so it will be necessary to make certain he has a
copy.)
6. Penetration of the American Embassy Moscow
(ANATOLE considers this a most important topic which requires
additional study and elicitation later after research will
permit us to assess NOSENKO's statements rapidly. ANATOLE
reiterates his concern that it is exactly and specifically
in this area that NOSENKO's reassurance of no KGB successes
is most likely diversion. ANATOLE expressed his concern that
in January he may have commented too extensively and theoret-
ically about this problen. Lie now wants to re-examine this
problem and refocus everyone back wore precisely to NOSENKO
and his story)
SECRET
-10-
7. Penetration of CIA (This is a topic for later
elicitation from KOSEIKO.)
8. VASSALL Case (MATOLE believes NOSENKO should
be asked to reconstruct completely in detail everything he
knows about the VASSALL case: tines, sources, officers, etc.,
at ong taped session. Simultaneously ANATOLE says we should
construct a complete chronology of everything NOSENKO
has said about the VASSALL case since June 1962, including
the questions or comments put to NOSENKO about VASSALL. An
analysis comparison of these two papers will follow.
ANATOLE proposes it may be possible to demonstrate
ho a possible penetration of CIA could have precluded NOSENKO's
safety from 1962 to 1964. This may assist us to solve our
problem and also be ultimately useful in confronting NOSENKO
on the point of his dispatch and apparent immunity.
9. Doris BELITSKIY Case (ANATOLE approved elicitation
and questioning on the basis of the summary and questionnaire.
ANATOLE stresses the need to confine the questioning to the
questionnaire and the fact that KOSENKO is not to bo given
additional information about the case, its origins, etc.,
cither as we knew it or now know it from ANATOLE. There will
be some tie-in to the elicitation about Vladimir Luovich ARTEMOV
and Aleksandr Konstantinovich KISLOV but other than the questions
as set forth in the papers ANATOLE reviewed there should be no
questions asked which brief HOSENKO or relate the three or
any other persons.
SECRET
-11-
ANATOLE needs a photograph of ARTEMOV to make certain
of identification and he needs photos chers in the delegation
with BELITSKIY to try to determine if there were other KGB
officers in the delegation who might have been in on the case
or the disinformation aspect)
10. The 1960 period of NOSENKO's career.
This is to be an elicitation topic later after we
have summarized what we can about NOSENKO's story of this
period. In reply to ANATOLE's question based on his review
of the paper NOSENKO Timetable and Associates I told ANATOLE
the researcher had found it impossible to date to sort out
and isolate NOSENKO's 1967-63 statements about his career
during the period 1960 to 1962. ANATOLE was told this was
obviously a priority job but that it just had been an in-
possible task without additional research and analysis. We
will discuss this fully when the isolation is completed and
in conjunction with other topics.
11. Vadim Viktorovich KOSOLAPOV 's November 1960 trip.
This item is for later elicitation after more
research is completed about the code clerks, perhaps a reinves-
tigation to make positive identifications, etc. ANATOLE asked
if KOSOLAPOV's trip to Copenhagen was confirmed (N-167 pg. 16)
and I told him I thought it was under a different name.
ANATOLE would like details.
SECRET
-12-
12. The Robert Lee JONSCH case.
ANATOLE considers this an important aspect of
NOSENKO's throw-away material. He again questions why the
SCD would lend technicians to the FCD and wants NOSENKO to
explain this in detail as well as to fully detail again how,
froa whoa, etc. NOSENKO learned of this case. ANATOLE is
of the opinion new questions can be asked but agreed to defer
elicitation on this case primarily because I pointed out
that in 1965 a paper was written setting forth apparent
inherent security weaknesses in the Johnson case some of which
at least suggested strongly that, in addition to Johnson's
lack of access at one time, the KCB could have anticipated
a blow at any moment. I outlined some of the points I recall
about the weaknesses of the principals and quite frankly I
told ANATOLE that I doubted that anyone currently of the opinion
NOSENKO is bona fide would be any more inclined to credit the
1965 paper today than he has in the past. I agreed that it
might be useful to again attempt to get NOSENKO's story about
the JOHNSON case when this story would be exclusively NOSENKO's.
13. Aleksey Mikhaylovich GORBATENKO.
ANATOLE wants NOSENKO to tell in detail everything
he knows about GORBATENKO. ANATOLE notes the 1955 promotion is
a key element but stresses no mention of this is to be made
to NOSENKO. Despite previous mentions of CORBATENKO, which
should be collated, NOSENKO is to restate everything completely.
SECRET
-13-
14. Serafim Nikalayevich LYALIN
Elicitation about LYALIN is to follow lator.
All references to LYALIN by NOSENKO should be collated with
collateral information about him. If there is a photograph
of LYALIN, ANATOLE wants to see it to verify any NOSENKO
identification.
ANATOLE
15. Vladislav Mikhaylovich KOVSHUK.
considers NOSENKO's information about KOVSHUK most important
as a later clicitation point. He does not want NOSENKO asked
any questions about KOVSHUK which nay relate to KOVSHUK'S
trip to the U.S.A. or KOVSHUK's association with KISLOV. If
NOSENKO in connection with detailing the biographios of his
friends includes any of this about KOVSHUK he is NOT to be
questioned on this matter or about the wonan trouble previously
mentioned.
ANATOLE needs exact dates KOVSHUK was in the U.S.
and any details of activities he can be given from FBI reporting.
In connection with our discussion about KOVSHUK possibly working
with and associating with journalists ANATOLE said he recalled
an incident which he thinks took place in 1959 whon he met
KOVSHUK on the street not far from the KGB offices when KOVSHUK
signalled him not to speak. ANATOLE did not and observed
KOVSIHUK meet a Soviet journalist in an apparent agent type meeting.
SECRET
-14-
ANATOLE said he had forgotten this incident and he never spoke
to KOVSHUK about it. ANATOLE cannot recall the name of the
journalist bat said he recalls knowing him slightly. He will
try to recall the name. (Hote for SM check: did KOVSHUK per
NOSENKO work vs. Americans with journalists and specifically
Ed Stevens?)
16. Eugene Peter SEREBRENNIΚΟΥ.
ANATOLE says what NOSENKO has said is clear
but that this needs full research and analysis - what he said
contrasted with what NOSENKO said and what SEREDRENNIKOV said
before asking NOSENKO about this again.
17. Adan BROCHES Case
ANATOLE was told this lead information was being
reviewed in detail. That there was some apparent confusion
and possibly misinterpretation or misunderstanding about his
lead information.
ANATOLE reiterated his point that the KGB wanted
to reestablish relations which had been broken after BROCHES
left France. ANATOLE knows about this from reading ZARUBIN
paper and he knows that the KGB wanted to talk to ZARUBIN
about this.
ANATOLE said that he would leave the decision
about when NOSENKO would be asked about BROCHES again to SM -
it could be immediately when the review was completed or later.
The review is in process and we will have to see what FBI
may have asked recently.
SECRET
-15-
18. Viktor KΟΡΕΥΚΙΝ. A later topic.
19. The CHEREPANOV Papers
ANATOLE stresses the importance of this case
but says this must be a later topic for NOSENKO probably in
interrogation although it may be useful to have NOSENKO
review his knowledge again in detail before confrontation.
ANATOLE referred to the need to analyze
the results of the BOWDEN investigation before proceeding too
far with HOSENKO. In this connection ANATOLE was told State
Security was securely organizing this investigation and that
it was currently planned that interviews would commence with
BONDEN first including mention to BONDEN about his mention
in the CIHEREPANOV papers. In response to ANATOLE's question
ho was told that to my knowledge the FBI did not yet know
about the BONDEN investigation since to date it was a State
Department inquiry based on a need to clarify certain possible
problems. ANATOLE said that he saw CHEREPANOV after CHEREPANOV
had transferred to the American Embassy Section wearing a
Lt. Col. military uniform. ANATOLE said this was unusual and
it suggests to him that CHEREPANOV was engaged in an operation,
perhaps a contact posing as a military beginning in 1959.
He said CHEREPANOV had as a constant companion a young man in
the American Department but ANATOLE cannot recall the young
man's name. (ANATOLE suggests later NOSENKO be asked if
CHEREPANOW wore a military uniform and who was his companion,
SECRET
-16-
probably in operations.) I told ANATOLE I did not know if
NOSENKO had named any friends of CHEREPANOV but would check
for names. ANATOLE said he recailed also there was a big
change in