14-00000
104-10171-10042
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
P
PYJLED
PROCESSING
ACTION
ACCOM
MISHED
10-
Chief, Task Force W
FO
FROM
Chief of Station, JMWAVE
syy Operation/GYROSE/KUCAGE/AMHINT
Report of Independent DRE Infiltration Operation
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
Action:
FYI and files
MAPPED FOR INDEXING
NO INDEXING REQUIRED
DAILY QUALIFIE
HEADQUARTERS DESK
CAN JUDGE INDEXING
ABSTRACT
によりFILM
1.
Ref : A.
WAVE 3851
B. WAVE 3911
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reprodubout
10
1. According to AMIHINT-42, on 20 May 1962 at about 2200 hours,
local, the Directorio Revolucionario Estudiantil (DRE) mounted an
operation independent of JMWAVE support, infiltrating AMHINT-40 and
AMHINT-53 at Kawama, Varadero Beach (2313N-8116W) The two-man
team was launched successfully and observed as they moved up the beach
and across a field to a lighted dwelling which is an operational
AMHINT safehouse, However, after the team were safehoused and during
recovery of the launch dinghy by the parent craft JUANIN I, a 12-man
militia patrol discovered them and challenged. During the brief fire-
fight that ensued, the JUANIN I crew reported that two to four militia-
men were observed to drop under their fire.
(According to reference
B confirmation of this operation there were no militia casualties,
and the local militia post also reported they had diflicted two to
three casualties "on the escapees".) The JUANIN I suffered no casualties
or hits, retired from the beach at speeds up to 30 knots and returned
to their base in Key Marathon without incident.
Distribution:
3- C/TFW
CROSS REFERENCE TO
CS COPY
CLASSIFICATION
S-E-C-R-E-T
DATE TYPED
19-120-19 CONDES
28 May 1962
DATE DISPATCHED.
MAY 31 1962
DISPATCH SYMBOL AND NUMBER
UFGA-4186
HEADQUARTERS FILE NUMBER
19-120-19/3
UBR
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
S-E-C-R-E-T
UFGA-4186.
2. At 1515 hours on 21 May, the DRE offices in Miami received a
commercial cable in prearranged code indicating the team had arrived
safely in Varadero. Later, at about 1620 hours, a telephone cali
indicated that the team were in safehouses in Havana since early
morning 21 May. On 22 May, a legal traveler, Heriberto LEON Rodríguez,
arrived in Miami and reported to DRE offices concerning this operation.
(Subject of a following dispatch.)0 LEON is the safehouse owner who
received the team, provided change of clothing, food, shelter, sent
the cable confirming safe arrival and later transported them to Havana.
Subject did not witness the beach encounter, but heard the fire-fight
and overheard reports of the encounter during a visit to the Militia
post the following morning.
It is also im-
3. The most significant operational factor of this mission is
that the militia post has reported the incident as an 'escape" and
has not suspected that an infiltration operation has taken place.
Therefore, no search or readblocks were set up and it can be assumed
that ANHINT safehousing in that area is still intact.
portant to note that, although conjecture at this point, apparently
the GOC has not given this clash the propaganda treatment given the
patrol encounter of their CV-28 with the SUSAN. ANN because it was
reported as an "escape" and therefore any casualties inflicted on escapees
would not make sympathetic propaganda. Also, there were reportedly no
militia casualties to give this clash propaganda value.
This,
4. This operation was mounted by orders of ANHINT-53 who was
becoming understandably desperate about DRE internal conditions.
Subject had been scheduled for infiltration three times over the past
three months and cancelled for reasons ranging from mission reception
hazards to reassessment and requirements for further training.
coming after a long history of DRE internal support problems and
obstacles, some of which resulted in costly operational losses and
compromises, prompted AMHINT-53 to mount the infiltration at any cost.
Subject's primary mission is to identify and confirm appointments
within clandestine apparat at national and provincial levels. Opera-
tional losses through arrest and KIA or execution during past four
months has resulted in almost two complete turnovers in leadership
at national levels. His secondary mission is to organize the National
Reception Committee for materiel supply and infiltration of paramilitary
instructors, radio operators and intelligence agents.
AMHINT-40, who has operated as National Reception Committee Organizer
for almost two years, formed the team with AMHINT-53. These preparations
within PBRUMEN should be ready by the time their radio operator,
AMHINT-52, completes his training.
5. Some of the pertinent operation details follow:
For this purpose
a. The JUANIN I is a new, 30-foot, BERTRAM built "Moppy",
recently purchased by the DRE for their infiltration and supply
operations. They have trained their crew and equipped their vessel
with the idea of offering it to JMWAVE in return for W/T communications
and armament support for their missions. Such a support agreement
has been approved in principle by JMWAVE and details are being worked
out by the Maritime Section, JMWAVE.
b.
On this operation, the vessel crew was as follows:
AMHINT-42, Captain
AMHINT-43, Navigator
AMBOUY-2, regionl intelligence and guide
Bernabe PENA Ballate, gunner
Manel QUISA, gunner
2/BR
CONTINUATION OF
DISPATCH
S-E-C-R-E-T
UFGA04186-9
c.
Vessel armament was procured by DRE and reported as:
1 ea SMG, M-3, Cal.45 (800 rds ammo)
2 ea FAR, Belgian, (200 rds)
2 ea Carbine, MlAl Cal .30 (300 rds)
1 ea Rifle, Garand M-1 (300 rds)
1 ea Pistol, Cal.45 (100 rds)...
1 ea Pistol, 9mm (100 rds)
10
:
6. According to ANHINT-42 narrative of the mission, the JUANIN I
departed Marathon base at 1430 hours local on 20 May with clear weather
and about one foot seas. Proceeding on a course of 186 degrees at about
17 knots cruising, the JUANIN I arrived at a point approximately 20
miles north of their launch point, (2330N-8115W) at about 2030 hours.
In order to reach their point at 2200 hours, and reduce daylight exposure
in the sensitive north coast area, they reduced speed and killed time.
Merchant vessels were observed and avoided since it was feared that
JUANIN position and course might be reported to GOC.
7. Upon arriving at their launch point, beach conditions were as
expected on this day of traditional festivity. The small park known as
10 Parque Infantil Init", was illuminated and much of the local populace
were dancing in the pavillion. AMHINT-42 selected a point about 500
yards north of the park and about 500 yards from their nearest safehouse..
As he brought the JUANIN into about 200 yards of the beach, the moon
was at about a 25 degree elevation and a fringe of pine shaded most.
of the deserted beach area where the team would land. The JUANIN is
a dark blue camaflouge color and was apparently not readily visible
from the beach. The team boarded the 12-foot, fiberglass dinghy with a
6 hp outboard and accompanied by AMBOUY-2 and Bernabe PENA for protec-
tive cover fire, proceeded to the beach. The landing was smooth and
without incident but after the team had made their way up the beach,
through the pines and acress the field to the safehouse, a patrol of
about 12 militia came down the beach,
8. The launch dinghy had just started from the beach when 'two of
the militia ran forward and challenged them to stop and return to the
beach. AMBOUY-2 and PENA opened fire at about 40 yards range, cbserv-
ing that both militia men dropped to the sand. The patrol then opened
up with one burst of automatic fire as the dinghy got underway to the
parent JUANIN. Meanwhile, the JUANIN came in to about 75 yards to
recover the dinghy and retire from the beach at top speed. During
recovery, the patrol kept up fire from one automatic weapon which was
ineffective and did not score one hit on personnel or craft.
9. Upon return to base, the JUANIN crew were warned by
AMHINT-42 of security implications and responsibilities of the
operation, i.e. any leak in Miami could result in the compromise of
AMHINT safe housing in that area as well as the death of the infiltrees.
There was no contact with ODYOKE agencies upon departure or re-entry
PBPRIME.
:
END OF DISPATCH
RIBR

