15/PV
14-00000
104-10183-10024
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
7 August 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD:
SUBJECT
:
AMWHIP/1 Meeting, New York City,
24 July 1963
1. Meeting Time/Place. The meeting was arranged by
telephone on 21 July, scheduled to take place on 47th Street.
Meeting took place as planned at 1400 hours. Subject and under-
signed then walked to Schraft's Restaurant located on W. 47th
Street. The meeting terminated without incident at 1540.
2. Purpose of Meeting.
1
The meeting was scheduled in
order to review Subject's activities on our behalf during his
recent trip to Europe, and to request him to write a letter to
be used if necessary for an introduction to Marc Seige), (aka 18
Seigelmann, a target presently residing in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(Letter subsequently was received. Nice job, too, see attachment.)
Operational Interest.
06
06
3. Marc Seigel. Subject agreed without hesitation
to prepare a letter for Introduction to Seigel. It was so (See
Attachment) addressed and worded so that the Rio C/O using same
could do so without directly involving Subject with ODYOKE
Cuban operations in Seigel's) mind. (Implications, of course,
In discussing
some time in
06 cannot be avoided in such games, it is realized).
Seigel) Subject said that had known Seigel for som
Havana, but by implication, did not consider him a particularly
close, Bersona personal friend. Subject stated that Seigel had run
a "health club" type of business, located in the Hilton Hotel
in Havana. With the revolution and the breaking of relations
with Castro Government by U.S.A. Seigel's business suffered
to the point that it was totally unprofitable. For this reason,
and perhaps others, Seigel does not hold any love for Castro or
his regime. During his residence in Havan ana Seigel developed
a close friendship with the former Brazilian Ambassador to Cuba
Laitao DA CUNHA, who was later instrumental in getting Seigel) ol
to emmigrate to Brazil, and also presumably in helping him get
his present job as a steel salesman. Subject said Seigelts a
good man but not without his foibles, and has the bravado and
extrovert-type of personality which enables him to enter any
To illustrate this, Subject
scene and bocompletely at ease.
related how Serge used to put on his "black-tie" and literally
crash very nice parties in Havana, and Invariably ended the evening
by having met everyone at the affair, including haveing made
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
MP
14-00000
SECRET
numerous new friends I gathered from Subject that he
a
०५
bit too much in this direction to suit his (Subject's) tastes,
but that he admired Seigel for the ability to pull off these
stunts. Subject inferred that because Seige) is a short,
slight man, he felt obliged to act in this manner. His personality
is pleasant, however, and is apparently a good mixer on the
cocktail circuit. He speaks French, Spanish, and English, all1
very well. He is able still to return to Cuba for a visit.06
should this be found desirable. Subject felt that Seigel) needed
money at the present time, a factor to be considered in any
recruitment pitch. Whether or not his dissatisfaction with
Castro would be any incentive for his cooperating with KUBARK
is problimatical, probably negative. Money, and perhaps the
adventure of the proposition would be the strongest motivations.
The rest of the information provided by Subject at this meeting
is already reflected in Seigel's file.
06
06
4. NICARO MINING CO. AMWHIP/1 stated that he was
well acquainted with Rafael L ("Lito") GONZALEZ, who has been
involved with the Nicaro Mines for a number of years and is
quite familiar with its physical lay-out and operations.
CONZALEZ) is in New Yorkfrequently and AMWHIP/1 offered to
arrange a meeting with GONZALEZ) anytime the writer wished.
AMWHIP/1 feels GONZALEZ has some valuable information and
perhaps ideas which would be useful to ODYOKE. Feeling that
such a well-known individual must already be in contact with
KUBARK, we did not press for details, but told AMWHIP/1 that
we would check the matter. (Upon consulting with EDE, it was
determined that no one is in contact with GONZALEZ and that
* such a meeting would perhaps be useful. This will be arranged,
priro to AMWHIP/I coming trip to Europe ca. first two weeks in
September '63. Traces have been initiated and POA will be
requested.
5. AMWHIP/1's European Trip in September. AMWHIP/1
plans to depart for Europe sometime during the first two weeks
of September. He will spend at least two or three weeks in Rome
looking after his new store in the Cavalieri-Hilton (see 4 June
contact report).03 He will at this time again be in contact with
the Rome Station, Bunce handling. He will undoubtedly be targeted
against members of the Cuban Diplomatic Corps stationed in Rome,
Ho hopes to have more time for this activity than during his
previous visit, when difficulties with the store opening occupied
much of AMWHIP/L's time. We will be in touch with AMWHIP/1
before this trip.
ت
Al. Gonzag
G
03
lliam E. Wainwright
C/O, SASBOB

