1000000
104-10338-10021
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
20 October 1965
OCI No. 2336/65
Copy No
190
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
CE AGENCY
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAL
INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM
CUBAN SUBVERSION IN LATIN AMERICA
DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
Office of Current Intelligence
-SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000,
SEGRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
OCI No. 2336/65
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Office of Current Intelligence
20 October 1965
INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM
Cuban Subversion in Latin America
1. Cuban spokesmen continue to reiterate their
determination to aid subversive movements in Latin
America. A variety of sources confirm that some aid
is being provided, although the level of such material
assistance seems to be less than a few years ago.
2. However, Cuba's activities in support of revolu-
tion in Latin America seem to be undergoing a change.
Ernesto "Che" Guevara's fall from power is sympto-
matic of this shift, Guevara was Cuba's most doc-
trinaire spokesman for militant revolutionary tactics.
Moreover, at the Havana Conference of 1964, Cuba
agreed to funnel its aid only to those subversive
movements endorsed by the pro-Moscow Latin American
Communist parties. It is still too early to judge
the extent to which this commitment is being imple-
mented. For the present, Cuba seems to be following
a cautious policy of providing support--largely in
the form of propaganda--in those countries where
Havana judges indigenous revolutionary movements to
have the most chance of success. Castro will probably
use this coming January's Tri-Continent Conference in
Havana for a summit meeting of Latin American sub-
versive groups to assess the results of the 1964
Havana Conference, what has been accomplished, and
what will be required for the future.
3. As recently as 3 October, Fidel Castro re-
affirmed that Cuba "is the fatherland of the revolu-
tionaries of this continent." He stated that Cuba
has the "responsibility" for aiding the revolutionary
movements in the hemisphere, and "we assume the re-
sponsibility and the consequences and the risks."
Lest there be any question as to Cuban aims he an-
nounced that "while there are exploited and colonial-
ized peoples, we shall continue running these risks,
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000,
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
and we shall continue serenely assuming these
responsibilities." In mid-August, another regime
spokesman called Cuba's assistance to subversion
his country's "international duty."
Propaganda Support
4. Propaganda has been the instrument most
heavily used by the Castro regime in its attempts
to overturn established governments in Latin Amer-
ica. Cuban broadcasts to Latin America total more
than 160 hours a week in Spanish, Portuguese, French,
Creole, and the Indian languages of Quechua, Guarani,
and Aymara. In the early days of the Castro regime,
such broadcasts were primarily devoted to strident
calls to immediate armed action. Now the emphasis
is more on laying the groundwork for future revolu-
tionary action and on attempts to unite feuding rev-
olutionary organizations. The majority of these
broadcasts masquerade as objective commentary on
political, economic, and sociological conditions in
the various countries of Latin America; they replay
statements by revolutionary groups, and feature
documentaries designed to show that only the "Cuban
way" will solve the problems of Latin America.
5. During the month of July, for example, one
third of Havana radio's total international radio
service commentaries were devoted to specific Latin
American countries. Venezuela received the greatest
attention, primarily through the regular three-times-
a-week program "Venezuelan Realities."
6. Broadcasts to Haiti are an exception to the
general rule. In these, Havana directly incites the
Haitians to launch immediate revolutionary action.
Haitian Communists long-resident in Cuba broadcast
vitriolic commentary on the economic and political
deterioration of Haiti and the need for unity among
the revolutionary forces. Commenting on the lack of
concrete action by Haiti's two Communist parties, a
recent broadcast stated, "it is of the utmost neces-
sity that all honest Haitians gather under the banner
of the Unified Democratic Front...to make Duvalier
pay for his treason and all of his crimes." On the
practical side of revolution, Havana radio has been
serializing selections on guerrilla warfare tactics
-2-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000,
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
and broadcasting speeches that were given in Cuba
by the representative of the militant Venezuelan
Armed Forces of National Liberation (FALN).
7.
Havana radio broadcasts have had some de-
gree of success, according to both their supporters
and their opponents. During the Dominican revolt,
several clandestine sources reported that the rebels
listened regularly to Radio Havana and were impressed
by the speed with which the Cuban network reported on
local developments. In Haiti, President Duvalier is
making strenuous efforts to outlaw the Cuban lottery;
Haitians listen to Radio Havana for the lottery re-
sults and absorb a good dose of anti-Duvalier propa-
ganda at the same time. Peruvian President Belaunde
has attacked the provocative reporting of_the_Cuban
radio, which the Peruvian Government, according to a
Clandestine source, plans to jam with equipment it
has yet to purchase. Venezuela is already jamming
Radio Havana. In August, a high Honduran official
Stated that his government has evidence of coded broad-
casts from Cuba.
Training
8. It is on training of Latin American sub-
versives and limited financial support of their move-
ments that Cuba rests much of its hope for revolution-
ary success. The experience of the Dominican Republic
--where a small group of Cuban-trained extremists was
able to lead the rebels in the worst of the fighting--
has probably convinced Havana of the merit of continu-
ing to train subversives from a variety of countries
so as to be ready for targets of opportunity. Cuba's
organ for intelligence and subversion, the General
Directorate of Intelligence (DGI), maintains installa-
tions for training Latin American subversives in the
specifics of revolutionary warfare and providing them
with ideological orientation. Two weeks ago the DGI's
director, Manuel Pineiro, was named to the Cuban Com-
munist Party's Central Committee and to its select
three-man foreign affairs committee, an act which af-
firms the priority Cuba places on the activities of
his organization.
9. Reliable estimates of the nationality and
numbers of trainees are difficult to obtain because of
-3-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
the devious routes most of them use to travel to
Cuba and because of the efficiency of the DGI in
providing false documentation. However, clandes-
tine sources provide some specifics on such travel
by Latin Americans.
was informed
that the party planned
to send 60 men to Cuba in early August for special
training in guerrilla tactics and Communist doctrine.
Another group of 15 to 20 men who had been under-
going training in Cuba was expected to return to
Guatemala during July. A number of Panamanians are
expected to leave for guerrilla warfare training in
Cuba in the near future; several earlier trainees
recently returned to Cuba for a refresher course.
10.
reports that
since early 1965 the People's Progressive Party (PPP)
of British Guiana--the party of ousted premier and
Castro-supporter Cheddi Jagan--has emphasized the
reorganization and expansion of its long-term po-
litical education program. On 1 September, Jagan's
wife reportedly told an organizer of the PPP that
she was making arrangements for a nine-month "political
science" course to be held in Cuba. Two PPP "scholar-
ship students" who returned to British Guiana in
September informed police that the obligatory military
training they had received in Cuba had included making
four types of bombs, including Molotov cocktails.
*
11. Although Jamaica is not one of Cuba's
priority targets in the hemisphere, a report of June
1965 indicates that Cuba intends to train about 200
Jamaicans during the next few years. These Jamaicans
are then to become leaders and instructors for the
pro-Castro elements in Jamaica. The Cuban Consul in
Jamaica, although not directly involved in the arrange-
ments, reportedly has given assurances that the group
would receive guerrilla warfare training if it could
get to Cuba.
*An additional 25 Guianese are scheduled to leave
soon for guerrilla warfare training in Cuba.
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
12. Although sufficient documentation is not
available, it is believed that Cuba continues to
train unspecified numbers of representatives from
other Latin American revolutionary groups. It
should be noted, however, that very few Colombians
and no known Peruvians are receiving guerrilla war-
fare training in Cuba at the present time, despite
the fact that these two countries are at the top of
Cuba's subversion list.
13. Cuba's only known large shipment of weap-
ons to a Latin American subversive group was a three-
ton cache seized by Venezuelan authorities in Novem-
ber 1963. This experience apparently convinced
Castro that weapons procurement is a problem to be
solved by the internal subversive forces, not by
Cuba. In a speech on 28 May, Castro said, "In
reality, the people's weapons are in the hands of
their enemies. ...When we learned to take weapons
from the enemy, we had learned to wage the revolution."
This appears to confirm the statement of a defector
from the DGI that because of the exposure of arms
shipments to Venezuela it is now Cuban policy to re-
ject all Latin American requests for assistance other
than for funds and some training.
The Havana Conference and Afterwards
14. The most significant recent change in
Cuba's support of subversion in the hemisphere oc-
curred at the Havana Conference of Latin American
Communist Parties held in November 1964. At that
time, Cuba and the Latin American representatives
agreed to limit their support to those revolutionary
movements officially endorsed by the pro-Moscow
Communist Party of the respective country. The
attending parties pledged themselves to increase
their support of such groups and to attempt to unify
revolutionary movements in the hemisphere.
15. Implementation of this policy involves a
sharp departure from past Cuban practice. Formerly,
Cuba devoted much of its support to revolutionary
groups which were competitors of the regular Commu-
nist parties. Cuba's adoption of the new policy may
partially be the result of its disillusionment over
the failure of these organizations, its recognition
-5-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
-SEGRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
of a need to repair relations with the old-line
Communist parties, and_some strong urging by the
Soviets. A letter
indicates
that Castro has indeed had a change of heart in
regard to the official Communist parties. Castro
is quoted as saying that "the present Communist
parties are the best things that each Latin Ameri-
can nation has" and his attitude is represented as
demonstrating that Castro's confidence in the Latin
American parties has increased substantially.
16. Along with agreeing to channel support
through the orthodox parties, the representatives
at the Havana Conference also specified the countries
in which they believe that an exploitable revolu-
tionary situation already exists: Venezuela, Guate-
mala, Colombia, Paraguay, Haiti, Honduras, and
Panama. All of these countries, and especially the
first three, are constantly mentioned by Cuban
spokesmen as the leading revolutionary targets in
Latin America. In July, Castro added Peru to this
list of areas of primary Cuban interest.
17. Evidence is still inconclusive as to the
extent to which the agreements reached in Havana
are being implemented. The results of the con-
ference seem to be most apparent in Guatemala.
Previously, extensive Cuban support--6200000
"1968 tone--had been provided to the 13th of Novem-
ber Movement led by Cuban-trained Marco Antonio Yon
Sosa. This group operated outside the official
Guatemalan Communist Party, the PGT. However, Cuba
has apparently switched its support to the PGT, which
has cooperated by establishing a_new paramilitary arm,
the_Rebel Armed Forces (FAR)
ported that the PGT had received a com-
munication from Castro stating that if the PGT succeeds
in intensifying its activities and sustains itself
until the end of 1965, Castro will then give the PGT
complete financial support. This pledge appears to
have been instrumental in increased militancy on the
part of the PGT and FAR.
18. Cuba confirmed its commitment to the PGT
at Cairo in September by insisting that the FAR, rather
-6-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
than the Yon Sosa group, be accepted as the official
Guatemalan representative to the preparatory meeting
for the "Tri-Continent" Conference. This conference
opens in Havana on 3 January. Thus the FAR is ap-
parently Havana's choice for Guatemalan representa-
tion at the Conference. Representatives of the Com-
munist and radical states of Asia and Africa, as well
as delegates from revolutionary movements in these
two areas and Latin America will be brought together
at the conference to discuss problems of imperialism
and colonialism, and ways to coordinate their revolu-
tionary movements. An observer at the Cairo meeting
commented that only the Guatemalan representative
seemed to be really in "Castro's pocket."
19. In Peru, Cuba is continuing its propaganda
support of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left
(MIR). In the past, the MIR received considerable
material assistance from the Cubans--although this
is no longer so. Its leader, Luis de la Puente Uceda,
has visited Cuba several times and is reportedly on
good terms with Castro. In an interview printed by
a Lima newspaper on 3 May, de la Puente was quoted
as saying, "I have chosen the path of action. Our
people's only way to liberation is armed rebellion..."
This statement was followed up in June, when the MIR
began its long-delayed guerrilla operations with at-
tacks near Huancayo in Peru's central zone. The
action has been applauded in Cuban propaganda media.
On 27 September, the Union of Peruvians in Cuba (one
of several such national groups parroting the Cuban
line) issued a manifesto stating, "under the condi-
tions prevailing in Peru, there is no other way to
eliminate all the ills that afflict our people than
the path blazed by the MIR guerrillas.
claim our wholehearted support to the guerrillas."
Formal Cuban support for this position was contained
in a July article in the Cuban daily Hoy which de-
clared, "The Peruvian masses have learned where the
only solution to their ills rests, and for that reason
they are looking today toward the mountains, the
jungles, and the guerrillas." Since August, the pro-
Soviet and pro-Chinese wings of the PCP have taken
increased cognizance of the guerrillas and condemned
the government's counterinsurgency activities. They
have not openly endorsed the MIR, however. At pres-
ent, it seems unlikely that either faction will support
...we...pro-
-7-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
The MIR with acts of violence. The pro-Soviet PCP
faction may yet decide to seek the best of both
worlds by giving partial support to the insurrec-
tional movements while continuing its current ac-
tivities in the political sphere..
20. It is believed that as of April, the Cuban
Government had cut off financial support to leftist
Peronist groups in Argentina and promised to channel
its support through the official Communist Party of
Argentina.
21. Venezuela and Colombia--two of Havana's
most emphasized targets in the hemisphere--fall into
separate categories. Cuba has always strongly sup-
ported the Venezuelan Armed Forces of National Libera-
tion (FALN), over which the Venezuelan Communist Party
(PCV) exercises a dominant influence. The PCV, beset
by internal problems, is making attempts to justify
more emphasis on political action, although not giving
up the support of paramilitary activities. The extent
of Cuba's current material support of the FALN is un-
known but the propaganda support is continuing at a
high level. Cuba maintains an official office for a
FALN representative in Havana and approved having a
FALN delegation at the Cairo preparatory meeting for
the Tri-Continent Conference.
22. In Colombia, it is even difficult to speak
of an official Communist party; on 30 May the party
split into two factions, each professing to be
"authoritative." The original Colombian Communist
Party (PCC), by far the larger, has been generally
content to follow a pacifist, political role, with
the exception of the defense of the so-called "en-
claves" of Marquetalia and Riochiquita. The rival
faction, the Colombian Communist Party--Marxist
Leninist (PCC-ML) is more violence oriented but there
is no evidence of its having received any support
from Cuba. Before the Havana Conference, Cuba sup-
ported an independent insurgent force, the Army of
National Liberation (ELN), with money and training.
However, this aid appears to have been terminated.
The ELN, in fact, may soon disband as an entity; its
remnants may be absorbed by the PCC-ML.
23. There are only tenuous indications that
another aspect of last year's Havana Conference--the
-8-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
promotion of unity among revolutionary forces in the
hemisphere--is being accomplished. A source of proven
reliability has reported that a Latin American Commu-
nist "politburo" has been established to coordinate
the implementation of the agreements reached at Havana.
This "politburo" reportedly held its first meeting in
Havana this spring. Another source, boost
..
Lomba, reports that the Communist
parties of Central America have formed the Military
Revolutionary Front of Central America to coordinate
Communist military movements in their area. The po-
litical bureau of this organization is reportedly
composed of the secretaries-general of the five Commu-
nist parties. This select group was planning to hold
its first meeting in August. Both of these unity
efforts appear to be still in the first stages of
organization.
Outlook
24. The shift in emphasis in Cuban propaganda
and Havana's assumption of the responsibilities and
drawbacks inherent in the decisions of the Havana
Conference reflect Cuba's increasing awareness of the
realities in Latin America. In 1959, Castro was con-
vinced that his revolution would spark similar revolu-
tionary movements in the rest of Latin America. He
backed up this conviction by blatant incitements to
immediate revolution and by aiding small-scale in-
vasions of Panama, the Dominican Republic and Haiti.
However, the luster of Castro's revolution has been
dimmed by Cuba's performance in the domestic field
and the failure of its hemispheric goals. In the last
two years, Castro's hopes have been rebuffed in
Venezuela, British Guiana, Brazil, and the Dominican
Republic, as well as in the failure of any of the
continent's militant subversive groups to overturn a
government. These have all served to convince Castro
that his "inevitable" revolution is not imminent.
addition, Castro now seems confident that his own
regime can continue to exist without like regimes
elsewhere in the hemisphere.
In
25. Thus, while Castro is still willing and
able to aid subversive movements, he has shifted em-
phasis. He now is concentrating on those countries
-9-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
where he believes the "objective conditions" are most
conducive to revolutionary action and where there is
a viable or potential revolutionary group to take
concrete action. The Cuban regime's constant refer-
ences to Venezuela, Guatemala, and Colombia stress
its desire to concentrate on these areas. At any
rate, Castro's consuming interest for the past year
and a half has been his desire to improve the per-
formance of Cuba's economy.
His revolutionary pro-
gram for Latin America has definitely taken second
place in his order of priorities.
26. The Havana conference was indicative of a
major policy shift in that Castro committed himself
to work with--not against or outside--the official
Communist parties. Part of this shift was based on
the dual hope that promise of his support would stir
the Communist parties to more militant policies and
that they could achieve together what he could not
achieve unilaterally. So far this hope has not been
realized.
27. Castro has also been forced to the realiza-
tion that tagging a "Communist" or "pro-Castro" label
on a movement is not always useful to Cuban interests.
This was demonstrated in Cuban reaction to the Domini-
can revolt. Havana apparently decided that the
achievement of popular support for the Caamano forces
demanded that Communist and Cuban-trained participation
in the revolt be overshadowed by its pro-constitution,
pro-Bosch, anti-Imbert cast. As a result, Havana did
not refer to Communist participation and used its
propaganda media to concentrate on the "evils" of the
Dominican military establishment, the Imbert junta,
and the OAS and US intervention.
28. Nor is Cuba alone in its realization that
identification of a movement as Castroite is not
always in the best interests of Cuba or the group
concerned
20. BrakePCC stated that one reason why his party
wavered in its support of a planned Solidarity with
Cuba Congress--which, significantly, has not been held
--is that its central committee now believes that
identification with Cuba is not in the best interests
of the party and is, in fact, dangerous.
-10-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
29. Two coming meetings may reveal whether Cuba
intends to maintain its new policies toward subversion
in Latin America. A clandestine source reported that
representatives of Cuba, the Latin American Communist
parties, and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
are scheduled to hold extensive discussions Reusetelist,
The Cuban delegate to
the congress is Lionel Soto, a member of the newly-
named Central Committee of the Cuban Communist Party
and the director of the regime's Schools of Revolu-
tionary Instruction.
30. An equally significant meeting of Latin
American representatives will reportedly take place
after the Tri-Continent Conference in Havana next
January. This conference will provide another op-
portunity for a summit conference of Latin American
Communist Parties. In addition, the identities of
the participating revolutionary groups may give a
hint as to Cuba's willingness to abide by the de-
cisions of the Havana Conference. At the preparatory
conference in Cairo, Cuba accepted a delegate from
the Guatemalan Communist party's new militant arm,
the FAR, rather than the long-time Cuban-supported
movement of Yon Sosa. This decision--as well as the
general question of what other Latin American move-
ments were to be invited--aroused controversy among
other participants. Изготавle Cuban source reports
that these differences of opinion over who should be
accredited to the Havana Conference led to the de-
cision that each Latin American leftist group will
have to agree upon the composition of a single dele-
gation from his country. Then Cuba, as the sponsor
of the meeting, will have the final say on who will
receive official invitations. This arrangement gives
Castro a great deal of leeway in designating those
whom he considers the most representative of the some-
times conflicting and antagonistic revolutionary move-
ments in several Latin American countries. If Havana
is indeed serious about living up to the commitments
it made last November, this meeting would provide an
excellent opportunity to assess the results of the
past year and to plan strategy to carry out more ef-
fectively the decisions of the Havana meeting.
31. This shift in Cuban policy toward subversion
does not, in itself, mean a lessening of the potential
-11-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
subversive threat against established governments in
Latin America. Moreover, hundreds of anti-government
extremists in a number of countries, feeling that
their grievances continue to grow, are moving ahead
with organizational efforts and plans to step up
violent activities. The total Cuban support effort
will probably be smaller, but more of the aid may
well be channeled to those who can use it effectively.
Cuban-trained militants already make up the hard core
of numerous Latin American extremist and Communist
groups. Cuba also has given ample notice that it in-
tends to continue its propaganda and some training and
financial support to revolutionary movements. The
only change is in regard to means and priorities, not
ends. As long as exploitable situations exist in
the hemisphere, Cuba is on record as being willing
and able to contribute toward the establishment of
"more Cubas" in Latin America. It seems increasingly
apparent, however, that Cuba is unwilling to run great
risks to provide material assistance to anti-govern-
ment groups in Latin America. Castro's more cautious
subversion policy means that now, more than ever, the
burden of carrying out revolutions rests with the
local revolutionaries themselves.
-12-
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
SECRET

