14-00000
104-10250-10080
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
-SECRET
27 January 1965
MEMORANDUM FOR: Jim O'Connor, TSD/Security
SUBJECT:
Contact with Herman E. Kimsey - Jan Beck, TSD/GARB
:
1. As you requested at our meeting on 25 January, I have prepared
this summary of my contact with Mr. Kimsey since he left the Agency
in August, 1962.
2. My contact with K. has been via the telephone, except for a
couple of occasions when I had lunch with him or he visited Chief, GARB
in Central Building. I cannot recall ever calling him, but his calls
to me have been mostly to the office and only a few to my home.
3. With a few exceptions his reason for calling seems to have
been non-specific; he just wanted to chat. Often he would open the
conversation with the gambit of asking for someone's telephone extension,
more than once for Thea Hall's extension, or for Dick Kuhn's home
address. Sometimes he would call my attention to something interesting
he had read in the paper about some new technique, some mutual friend, etc.
Occasionally he would seem to be fishing for information about old
associates, mainly Mrs? (Hall) and Dick Kuhn: how they were doing and
what they were doing nowadays, and so on. Since I usually avoided
answering such questions directly, I cannot tell if he already knew
about the person in question and wanted confirmation, or if he was
fishing. The bulk of the converstions then consisted mainly of
dialogue about his job plans, family, mutual friends outside the Agency,
and so on.
4. Several calls were about the one instance when I was directly
involved with him on a project. It pertained to a job opening which
I had heard about and wanted to pass on to him. It was as a document
examiner or a related job with the Multnomah County Sheriff's Office,
Portland, Oregon. He seemed interested in pursuing the possibility,
but in a recent conversation he had still not applied and did not seem
interested.
5. The only other calls on a specific subject where those on
the subject of the Anastasia story, early in 1964, and on the Polish
colonel's claim, 22 January 1965. On the Anastasia subject he mentioned
his involvement in the case via Cleve Backster and gave me the general
background as he saw it, including a certain intrigue involving "Reds
working for 'Life' magazine" and the Soviet and British intelligence
services pobably being in the background to protect their interests.
GROUP 1
Excluded from automating
downgrading and
declassification
14-00000
2
-
6. Until 22 January hehad no mentioned the subject of the
Polish colonel at all. He called me at home, and I immediately
took up the subject since I had read about his disclosures in the
paper a week earlier. When I prodded him about being in trouble
over the newspaper interview, he appeared confident that he was not
in any trouble because he was "in daily contact with Agency people".
He further said that his purpose in the disclosure was to pry loose
from the Agency those documents which would help the colonel establish
his true identity. But it was pretty obvious that K. was surprised by
the big play given the story in the paper. In fact, he had even
considered calling the reporter and asking him to retract some
distortions he did not say which in the story, but on second thought
could not put his finger on any clear-cut error worth fighting over.
Other items from the conversation: if the colonel's claim is successful
K. and Cleve Backster would turn over any share of the fortune to
"the fund for promoting the lie detector", except their expenses and
time now paid out of their own pockets; K. is convinced of the colonel's
claim to the fortune being legitimate. He did not seem to be fishing for
information about the reaction in the Agency to the newspaper story. All
he said about it was to ask how Lon Thomas reacted. K. did give me the
impression that he had examined some (identity?) documents of the
colonel when working for TSD/GARB in 1961 (?) because he said that I
would recomize the nan's picture if I saw it. But he immediately changed
his mind and said "it was probably before your time". When I asked him
if he wasn't ursuing a matter which he only knew about from his official
capacity in working for the Government, he assured me that he had only
learned of the colonel's claim to be the son of the Czar late last year
(possibly he said at the time of the Presidential campaign). At the
end of the hour-long conversation he stated the real reason for calling
and that was to tell me that the colonel was to be on television, the 11
o'clock news on ABC/Channel 7. This must have been a mistake on his part
because that news program is local and not a network program from New York.
7. This summary is the best of my recollection; if you need
additional information, I will be glad to fill in the gaps.
Tan Berk
JAN BECK
TSD/GARB/DS
xー2009
SECRETA

