1000000
104-10336-10011
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
ASSASSINATION
REVIEW
RECORDS
BOARD
eCIA IRTर
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202)724-0088 Fax: (202) 724-0457
December 18, 1997
Mr. John Pereira
Chief
Historical Review Group
Center for the Study of Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, D.C. 02505
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF OIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
073/30/00
Re: Status of CIA Responses to Assassination Records Review Board's Requests for
Additional Information and Records
Dear John:
I am writing to follow-up on our telephone call earlier today and to convey my serious
concern about the status of CIA's responses to the Review Board's requests for
additional information and records. Although CIA has completed its responses to
several requests, and many others have been answered in part, a significant number of
requests have not been answered - including some that were made more than two
years ago. On many occasions we have been assured that responses would be
forthcoming, only to have promised dates come and go without answers. It is now
extremely important that these requests be answered promptly so that we may conduct
a proper follow-up if necessary. The issues that we can now identify as being of the
highest priority are identified in the text below by double asterisks (**)¹ and we request
that they be answered within the next month. We request that the remaining requests
be answered by April 1, 1998.
The remainder of this letter is divided into two parts: first, a listing of the formal
requests for information and records, and second, a listing of the informal requests for
information and records. Please let me know if your understanding of any of the
following points differs from ours so that we can resolve any potential discrepancies.
'As identified more fully below, the issues are: CIA-1 Organizational Material,
CIA-6 Cables and Dispatches, CIA-13 Backchannel Communications, CIA-IR-03
HTLINGUAL Documents, CIA-IR-04 Disposition of Angleton Files, CIA-IR-07 Claude
Barnes Capehart, CIA-IR-15 Electronic "take" from Mexico City, CIA-IR-21 DRE
Monthly Operational Reports, CIA-IR-22 "A" Files on Clay Shaw and Jim Garrison.
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
13-00000
Mr. John Pereira
December 18, 1997
Page 9
CIA-IR-12 Contacts with Journalists or Publishing Houses.
The Review Board seeks to determine to what extent, if any, CIA might have
attempted to influence any journalists or publishers regarding public discussion
of the assassination. This request, originally discussed in March 1997, was raised
at the DO follow-up briefing on April 1, 1997. CIA has had no response and no
time frame for a response.
CIA-IR-13 Office or Person Dealing with Organized Crime and Cuba.
The Review Board requested that CIA make a particular personnel file available.
The file was made available by CIA for review. The Review Board seeks a full
and accurate formal response to this request detailing any and all searches made
and the results of those searches. Once a formal statement is provided, this
request will be complete.
CIA-IR-14 Breckinridge Files.
CIA (OGC) will determine the disposition of the files of Scott D. Breckinridge.
CIA has had no response and no time frame for a response.
**CIA-IR-15 Electronic "take" from Mexico City Station.
The Review Board has for some time been attempting to determine whether it
has had access to all of CIA's surveillance "take" from the Cuban and Soviet
facilities in Mexico City at the time of the Oswald visit and in the immediate
wake of the assassination. On numerous occasions, the Review Board has asked
whether there was any surveillance take in addition to what is currently in the
collection.
On March 18, 1997, the Review Board provided additional leads to CIA to assist
it in answering these questions. The DO has agreed to check Headquarters
records for the file referenced in HMMW 12454, to search for the crypts cited in
this document, and to search for HMMA 20307 and other cables or dispatches
cited in this document.
In addition, the DS&T will query its offices for possible records on Mexico City
and Cuba and for the present location of Staff D records. Regardless of the
13-00000
SECRET
24 August 1998
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Laura Denk
Executive Director, ARRB
J. Barry Harrelson
Project Officer, HRP/OIM
CIA-IR-12, Contacts With Journalists or
Publishing Houses
1. This is the Classified response to referent request..
2. (U) The ARRB staff requested information to
determine to what extent, if any, the Agency might have
attempted to influence any journalists or publishers
regarding public discussion of the JFK assassination.
3. (U) The unclassified response to this request
describes the fact a number of covert action projects
existed for the purpose of thwarting the expansion of
Communism throughout the world. Within those projects there
were relationships with journalists and publishing houses.
4. (S) The specific cryptonyms used for these projects
are mentioned in House Select Committee on Assassinations
document 180-10142-10087. The cryptonyms and a brief
description of each Covert Action Staff project follows:
A. QKOPERA- a project designed to counter Soviet
activities in international organizations. It was
specifically designed to unite and promote anti-Communist
intellectuals. The true name of the project was possibly
the Farfield Foundation.
B. OKPUNDIT - a project involved in book publishing
matters and the international distribution of anti-Communist
books. It was known previously by the cryptonyms ZRBLESS
WUPUNDIT and WUBONBON ORMATADOR and ORMOSAIC were related
projects.
C. WUSENDER - a project to purchase and distribute
books.
D. WURASIN - a project to cover the international
mailing of American books translated into Spanish and
French.
E. WUTRANSIT - a project to purchase and mail books
to selected addressees in Latin America and Africa.
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
F. WURABBIT - a project to cover a worldwide news
and feature story service. It was possibly a cryptonym for
Continental Press or Praeger Publishing?
G. WUTARY and WUTAROY (believed to refer to the
same project), one for press and propaganda development on
targets of opportunity involving Latin America.
5. (U) This, together with the unclassified
memorandum, completes Agency action on this project. If you
have any questions, please advise.
J. Barry Harrelson
SECRET
CL:
0611637
CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL:
DRV:
X1
HUM 2-82
13-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
fite cy
18 September 1998
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Ms. Laura Denk
Executive Director, ARRB
J. Barry Harrelson
JFK Project Officer, HRP/OIM
CIA-IR-12, Contacts With Journalists or
Publishing Houses
1. This is in response to referent request which asked
for information about possible CIA contacts with journalists
and publishing houses in the context of the JFK
assassination and ensuing investigations.
2. Following a search of its records, the Directorate
of Operations provided a response which describes a number
of such activities engaged in by the Agency. The DO
response is attached hereto.
3. This completes the Agency's action on this request.
If you have any questions, please advise.
Att. A/S
J. Barry Harrelson
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
21 August 1998
MEMORANDUM FOR: (U) Chief, JFK Declassification
FROM:
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
Project/HRP/OIM/DA
(U) Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
Chief, Information Management Staff,
External Support Group
(U) DO Response to CIA IR 12
(U) ARRB Request for Additional
Information and Records No. CIA IR 12
1. (U) This memorandum is an unclassified response to
informal request number 12 (CIA IR 12) from the staff of the
Assassination Records Review Board (ARRB). A classified
response will also be provided to be more specific and
detailed. The staff has requested information about contacts
with journalists or publishing houses, that is to what
extent, if any, CIA might have attempted to influence any
journalists or publishers regarding public discussion of the
assassination.
2. (U) The terms like “journalists,” “publishers,”
"publishing houses,” “media,” and other such generic terms
were not searchable. To answer this question required the
research of crypts mentioned in various documents in the JFK
"assassination records."
3 (U) The research of the crypts provided from
documents in the JFK "assassination records" all refer to
projects managed under the overall guidance of a staff in
the Directorate of Operations and in all instances they were
projects that concern press and propaganda programs designed
to promote anti-Communism and to counter Soviet press and
propaganda initiatives worldwide. Specifically, these
various projects were developed for the following reasons:
A. to counter Soviet activities in international
intellectual organizations, in order to unite and
promote anti-Communist intellectuals.
B. to be involved in book publishing matters and
the international distribution of anti-Communist books.
UNCLASSIFIED
13-00000
UNCLASSIFIED
SUBJECT: (U) DO Response to CIA IR 12
C.
to purchase and distribute books.
D.
to cover the international mailing of American
books translated into Spanish and French languages.
Ε. to purchase and mail books to selected
addressees in Latin America and Africa.
F. to cover a worldwide news and feature story
service.
G.
as a Press and Propaganda Developmental and
Target of Opportunity project involving Latin America.
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
UNCLASSIFIED