1000000
104-10306-10015
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence
VIA : Deputy Director (Plans)
SUBJECT : Current Status of Cuban Exile Reactions
to the Resignation of Dr. Jose MIRO
Cardona
REFERENCE : Memo to DCI, dated 11 April 1963;
Subject: Cuban Exile Reactions to the
Resignation of Dr. Jose MIRO Cardona
1. This memorandum is for your information and is
in response to your request for an updating of reference
memorandum.
2. Our Station in Miami reports that Dr. MIRO has
called a meeting of the Cuban Revolutionary Council (CRC)
for today to reiterate his intention to resign and actually
go through with his resignation if he does not receive word
that the President wants to discuss the matter with him or
if he receives no indication from Washington that there
is a definite plan for the liberation of Cuba. The final
decision may be postponed until 18 April, at which time it
is expected that Dr. MIRO's resignation will be formally
accepted. MIRO would accept a military man, such as
General Maxwell Taylor as an emissary from the President,
but does not want to deal with a "Harvard Professor." MIRO
would expect this emissary to be able to point to specific
United States policies and programs for the overthrow of
the CASTRO regime.
3. Our Station in Miami further reports that Dr.
MIRO has decided not to release his entire 25 page
resignation statement to the press in its present form
as it is too long to be published in the newspapers except
as a paid advertisement. MIRO does intend, however,
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000
SECRET
-
2
-
to delete quotes from high level United States Government
officials and issue instead a "hard hitting" statement
based on the substance of the 25 page document.
4. It is Dr. MIRO's opinion that when he resigns
the CRC will liquidate itself. He feels that the United
States Department of State had planned the liquidation
of the CRC as one of the last steps in the development
of a co-existence policy with the CASTRO regime. When
his resignation becomes effective, Dr. MIRO feels it
will be impossible for him to continue living in the
United States after all the furor created by this
incident. It has previously been reported that Dr. MIRO
might leave the United States to form an organization
similar to the CRC in another friendly country.
5. Meanwhile, there appears to be sharp differences
of opinion within the CRC and among other independent
exile groups and individuals as to the wisdom of Dr.
MIROs precipitous action in threatening to publish his
letter of resignation, thus causing the alienation of
the United States Government and the probable collapse
of the CRC itself. Dr. MIRO is confident that the CRC
will support his action and its members will, in turn,
use his resignation as an occasion for denouncing current
United States policy on Cuba. According to Dr. MIRO,
the Revolutionary Students Directorate (DRE) and the
Association of Cuban Lawyers in Exile have pledged their
support to him and will make public statements in his
behalf. He claims that he is receiving messages of
support from Mexico, Brazil and Chile, some requesting
copies of his 25 page resignation statement. A plan to
create a Hemisphere-wide organization to begin a
campaign to free Cuba is allegedly underway.
6. Dr. MIRO claims that the United States Government
is now taking the line of insulting and attacking him
and he has declared that he "will not stand for being
insulted" by the U. S. Government in addition to the
followers of BATISTA and CASTRO. He added that CASTRO'S
announced support of United States Government treatment
of him tends to support his suspicion that the U. S.
Government is following a line of peaceful co-existence.
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
-
3
He states that he has heard from "friends," whom he did
not further identify, that the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee might request him to testify before that
committee. Although reluctant to get involved in a
political situation in which certain questions would
be asked which he feels probably should not be answered,
he would, of course, comply, if subpoenaed. He has sent
word to Cuban trainees in the U. S. Army not to abandon
their training, having heard that a number of Cuban exiles
undergoing officer training had their bags packed ready
to leave Fort Benning as a result of the incident
concerning him.
7. The Miami Herald of 12 April, speculated that
MIRO may be using the United States anti-raid decree
and threatened resignation in order to win support from
exile groups not affiliated with the CRC. A spokesman
for one such group claimed that Dr. MIRO was displaying
to exile leaders a letter from President Kennedy purported-
ly pledging United States aid to exiles in their fight to
liberate Cuba. According to The Miami Herald, opposition
to United States anti-raid policy has brought about exile
unity not seen since April 1961. UPI correspondent Adolfo
Merino is preparing a campaign in favor of Dr. MIRO,
according to Dr. MIRO. Merino allegedly told Dr. MIRO
that there appears to be a campaign in Washington to
denigrate Dr. MIRO, and he intends to counter this campaign.
Merino also stated that he knew the contents of Dr. MIRO'S
25 page resignation statement although he had not personally
seen the document itself.
8. A Miami Station source reports that the present
crisis between Dr. MIRO and the United States Government
has caused great and wide-spread pessimism in exile groups.
This is not due to any popular support which Dr. MIRO has
among the exiles, but because of the issue involved, i.e.,
the restrictions imposed upon Cuban exile efforts to
defeat CASTRO, and upon this issue the exiles are compelled
to support Dr. MIRO whether they like him or not.
9. It is noteworthy that Manuel Antonio de VARONA
Loredo, a leading member of the CRC and one of the most
outspoken critics of the United States policy on Cuba,
privately believes that Dr. MIRO has gone too far and too
fast in his dispute with the Kennedy administration.
13-00000
SECRET
-4-
VARONA understands that MIRO was asked by Washington
officials to wait 30 days before taking a definitive
position and thus be able to view the crisis more
calmly, but MIRO refused. VARONA believes that the
abruptness of this action was an error on MIRO's part.
VARONA said that he is opposed to the publication of
MIRO's resignation because the document touches upon
sensitive and confidential areas and would be prejudicial
to the Cuban cause. He hopes that a middle course can
be found as a way out of the present crisis. There
appears to be some sentiment in the CRC to continue the
organization with a new president. Enrique HUERTAS Pozo,
head of the Cuban exile doctors association, has
hinted that he would be prepared to step into the vacant
presidency of the CRC.
10. Dr. MIRO's rivals and enemies in the Cuban
exile community are reportedly making plans to exploit
the political vacuum which they expect will be created
by the resignation of Dr. MIRO and the anticipated
collapse of the CRC. Followers of Manuel RAY Rivero
are reported to be pleased with the crisis between
the CRC and the United States Government and hope that
the split becomes irrevocable. If Dr. MIRO resigns
they believe that RAY, with the backing of liberal
Latin American leaders, will become the principal
Cuban exile leader. Although Manuel ARTIME Buesa,
secretary general of the MRR and former political chief
of the Brigade, has extended his support to Dr. MIRO
in the present crisis, it is known that ARTIME has
nothing but contempt for MIRO. This may, therefore,
be a political tactic to encourage MIRO to break relations
between the CRC and the United States Government and
thus place ARTIME in a more advantageous position,
vis a vis, the Cuban exile community and the United
States Government. One group, the Peoples Revolutionary
movement. (MRP), which had recently decided to join
the CRC, changed its plan when Dr. MIRO's controversial
resignation was publicized. The MRP leaders came to
the conclusion that the CRC was finished and they
thereupon entered into negotions to omalgamate with
the ALPHA 66 and the Second National Front of the
(SNFE) Escambray (SME). Followers of former President
Fulgencio BATISTA are reported to be delighted with
MIRO's difficulties and they now feel that MIRO is
getting what he deserves for having played the role
of a U.S. puppet.
11. In another development, related to, but not
13-00000
SECRET
-5-
directly a result of the MIRO situation, there appears
to be a movement within the Cuban Brigade to organize
a formal request for the return of the Brigade flag,
which was presented to President Kennedy at the Orange
Bowl ceremony for the Brigade on 29 December 1962,
An attempt will be made to obtain the support of those
members of the Brigade who are stationed at Fort
Jackson and Fort Benning who will be on leave in
Miami over the Easter weekend. Subsequent to this,
it is planned to circulate a letter to all local
Miami radio and T.V. outlets announcing the intention
of the Brigade to demand the return of their flag.
12. We conclude from the foregoing that Dr.
MIRO's usefulness to the U.S. Government and to the
Cuban exile community has come to an end, even if he
should reconsider at the last moment his decision
to resign. His resignation and the probable
disintegration of the CRC is likely to usher in a
period of intense political manuevering and jockeying
for status among the various political groups and
the many self-styled leaders in the Cuban exile
community. It is not likely that this process will
result in any greater degree of genuine unity and
cohesiveness in the Cuban exile community than has
existed in the past. More than ever, the prime
target of these exile leaders in their efforts to
gain support and patronage will be the United States
Government, without whose assistance, they are convinced,
no effort to unseat the CASTRO regime can be successful.
Desmond FitzGerald
Chief, Special Affairs Staff
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
13 April 1963
SUBJECT: Summary Analysis of Funds Granted to the Cuban
Revolutionary Council for the Period 1 May 1961
through 31 March 1963
1. A budgetary analysis has been prepared covering U.S. Government
financial support to the Cuban Revolutionary Council (CRC) for maintenance
of its organizational entity and operational activity and for payments to
and on behalf of the Brigade.
2. Period covered: The analysis covers payments made from 1 May
1961 through 31 March 1963.
3. Organization: The CRC was formed early in 1961 and worked in
conjunction with the Frente Revolucionario Democratico (FRD). The latter
organization provided the "front" for the Brigade forces before and after
the Bay of Pigs in addition to conducting propaganda and political action
activities. Although the CRC was not designated the focal point for
Cuban exile activities until September 1961, no distinction has been
made in this analysis since the CRC absorbed many of the FRD activities.
4. Funding of CRC: Each month the CRC submits a request for funds
which is based on general purpose: administrative support of the Council,
propaganda activities, underground activities, special expenses of the
Latin American delegations, subsidy support of the Judicatura Cubana
Democratica (Jurists), and Brigade compensation payments.
5. Financial reports: Monthly the CRC Comptroller prepares a
detailed financial report on the use of funds granted the Council. This
report is sent to the CIA representative in Miami and is then forwarded
to Headquarters.
6. Summary: During the period 1 May 1961 through 31 March 1963
the CRC received $3,000,000 from the U.S. Government for administrative
and operational expenses. (Note: This figure does not include Brigade
payments which totaled $8,300,000 for this same period.) Dr. Miro
Cardona, President of the CRC, receives compensation of $600 a month
($7,200 annually) plus travel and related business expenses.
7. Attached are (A) Description of Funds Granted; and (B) Resume
of the CRC financial report for October 1962, a report which is
representative of the Council's expenses.
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000
SECRET
ATTACHMENT A
DESCRIPTION OF FUNDS GRANTED
CUBAN REVOLUTIONARY COUNCIL
1 May 1961 - 31 March 1963
ADMINISTRATIVE AND OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY:
Administrative funds are used for salaries, travel,
office expenses, and related costs of the Council.
At the present time $83,333 is granted each month
($1,000,000 a year) for these costs.
Operational activity funds are used for the Council's
propaganda and underground operations, special expenses
of the Latin American Council delegations, and sub-
sidy to the Jurists. At the present time, the Council
receives $55,400 a month for these activities.
BRIGADE SUPPORT:
April 1961 returnees:
Payments to Brigade members who returned from Cuba
in April 1961 were continued through July 1961.
Compensation (including bonus) payments amounted
to $1,000,000.
Non-returnees:
Brigade support payments for non-returnees (includes
60 prisoners paroled in April 1962, returnees in
December 1962, and members missing or killed in
action) amounted to $7,300,000 for compensation,
bonuses, and medical expenses.
TOTAL FUNDS GRANTED TO CRC
•
•
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
$3,000,000
8,300,000
11,300,000
13-00000
SECRET
ATTACHMENT B
RESUME OF CRC FINANCIAL REPORT
October 1962
Council President's office: Includes rent and related office
expenses, travel, and discretionary fund.
$5,121
Executives: Compensation to 13 Council members at $350 a month.
4,550
Delegations: Salaries of delegations to Latin American countries
and in the United States. Delegations are located in
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Chile,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Panama, Santo Domingo, Uruguay, Venezuela, Washington, D.C.,
and New York.
15,444
Payroll: Salaries of Council employees. The highest paid
27,782
employee receives $400 a month.
No. of employees
Dr. Miro's office
12
Comptroller's office
11
Office employees
41
Mov. Rescate Revolucionario Democratico
15
Mov. Democrata Cristiano
13
Mov. Agrupacion Montecristi
16
Mov. Recuperacion Revolucionaria
9
Mov. 30 de Noviembre
8
Mov. Triple A Independiente
5
Dr. Enrique Huerta's office
1
Ing. Carlos Hevia's office
1
Sergio Carbo's office
1
Newspaper men
6
Dr. Antonio Maceo's office
2
Propaganda office
6
147
Total employees on payroll
Travel: Travel expenses of Council members and employees.
General Expenses: Office rent, telephone, supplies and equipment,
utilities, translation services, insurance, etc.
Military Committee: Salaries of 16 employees and expenses.
Heroes and Martyrs: Assistance to widows and dependents of
Cubans killed or imprisoned by Castro and to other
appropriate individuals.
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
1,078
11,431
3,865
3,381
13-00000
SECRET
ATTACHMENT B
Page 2
Social Work: Salaries of 7 employees and expenses.
Visa Waiver: Salaries of 5 employees and expenses.
Organizations: Salaries of 9 employees.
Brigade: Salaries of 3 employees and expenses for the Council's
activities in connection with the Brigade. This does not
include U.S. Government payments passed through the CRC
to Brigade members and dependents.
TOTAL COUNCIL ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
•
Propaganda: Production and distribution of written material,
radio time, posters, etc.
$4,360
3,160
2,250
1,627
•
84,049
21,629
Underground: Payments to member groups of the Council for
underground activities in Cuba.
16,500
Latin American Delegations: Operational expenses of the
4,204
Council's delegations.
Judicatura Cubana Democratica: Subsidy to Jurist group which is
5,000
affiliated with the CRC.
TOTAL COUNCIL OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY EXPENSES
...
47,333
Brigade compensation (payments to dependents)
297,377
Returnee (April 1962) medical expenses
6,867
TOTAL BRIGADE SUPPORT
304,244
TOTAL CRC FINANCIAL REPORT FOR OCTOBER
.... •
435,626
SECRET
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
13-00000
MEMORANDUM FOR THE FILE
16 April 1963
4-16-63
SUBJECT: Meeting with the President 5:30 - 15 Apr 1963
In Palm Beach, Florida
1. Mr. Lundahl gave a complete briefing on the latest satellite
photography of the Soviet Union and both satellite and U-2 photography of
Communist China.
2. Reviewed with the President the details of the Helms/Angleton
papers covering their counter-intelligence work in the French effort to
penetrate certain U. S. scientific areas. I recommended to the President
that we initiate a program of misinformation, which the President approved,
and Helms and Angleton were instructed to proceed. The justification for the
Helms/Angleton activities were based upon intelligence received from
which was confirmed by the French intelligence sources, of a plan on the
part of the SDECE to penetrate certain US scientific and nuclear installations.
3. Discussed in some detail the Donovan negotiations in Cuba. Gave
the President a copy of Miskovsky's summary of the Donovan discussions
and a copy of my memorandum of April 15th on Cuba. President raised the.
question of Miro Cardona, stated that Cardona had misrepresented the facts.
I urged that the President not involve himself personally in a public argu-
ment with Miro Cardona.
I raised the question of the possibility of working on Castro with
the objective of disenchanting him with his Soviet relations causing him to
break relations with Khrushchev, to effect the removal of Soviet troops
from Cuba, reorient his policies with respect to Latin America, and
establish in Cuba government satisfactory to the rest of the Hemisphere.
I. explained to the President that the Cuban problem must be solved in
one of two ways; either the manner outlined above or alternatively, by
bringing consistent pressure of every possible nature on Khrushchev to
force his withdrawal from Cuba, and then to bring about the downfall of
Castro by means which could be developed after the removal of the
Soviets troops (but not before) and thereafter establish a satisfactory
government in Cuba. I stated to the President that we were studying
both courses of action and I had not made up my mind concerning the
feasibility of either plan. The President thought both approaches should
be carefully examined and suggested the possibility of pursuing both
courses at the same time. In any event it was decided that we should
13-00000
keep the Donovan channel open. I advised the President that Donovan
has to return to Havana at the end of the week and that I will see him
privately prior to his departure.
4. The President and I talked at some length concerning sabotage
in Cuba. I expressed grave doubts and pointed out the hazards from his
standpoint in view of the stand-down of the hit-and-run exile operations,
the danger of attribution, etc. The President seemed to question
whether active sabotage was good unless it was of a type that could
"come from within Cuba." I said this was very difficult and that the
initial operations conceived were from the sea. I said I thought a program
should be engaged in only if it was an essential building block in an
agreed program to remove the Soviets from Cuba and to take care of
Castro.
5. Advised the President of my plans for a brief trip to Europe.
Also advised him that I had delayed my departure for a few days in order
to meet with the Killian Board on April 23rd. I repeated my very strong
objections to the Killian Board report and that I felt the report should
either be withdrawn from the Board or amended. The President urged
that I not engage in a controversy over this report, he had decided not
to circulate it, that only one copy was in existence, and as far as he
was concerned he had dismissed the entire matter. I told the President
I had not discussed the Board's report with the Board, but if they brought
it up I intended to urge its amendment but would not engage in a
controversy with the Board.
6. (Discussed briefly the problems of Soviet leadership in the
USSR and gave the President a copy of the paper on this subject.
7. Advised the President of the study of future satellite photography
which I had initiated. It was obvious from our brief discussion on this
subject that the use of the OXCART over Soviet territory was of great
concern to him and he was most hopeful of improving satellite photography
to a point where it would suffice our intelligence needs.
8. Briefly discussed the views of Mr. Kelly Johnson on the TFX
and the Navy's plans to install a submarine research center on Andros
Island in the Bahamas.
JAM/mfb
4/тс
13-00000
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
Read 4/10 at
Not relamed
MEMORANDUM FOR: The President
SUBJECT:
Donovan Negotiations with Castro
1. James Donovan returned from Cuba yesterday after a four-
day visit. As a result of talks with Castro, the Americans imprisoned
on the Isle of Pines are to be released on 22 April. During the intervening
period Castro will observe closely American policy toward Cuba and make
sure that the Red Cross deliveries are being concluded in good faith.
2. The main thrust of Donovan's discussion, however, was
political and can best be evaluated by a very confidential statement made
to Donovan by Doctor Vallejo, a close personal advisor of Castro who
was present at the meetings. Vallejo said Castro knew that relations
with the United States are necessary and Castro wanted these developed.
However, there are certain Cuban Government officials, communists,
who are strongly opposed, even more than certain people in the United
States. These officials are under close surveillance. They have no
great following in Cuba; but if they rebelled at this time, Cuba would be
in chaos. He believed that Donovan and Castro could work out a plan for
a reasonable relationship between the two countries.
3. Donovan had two sessions with Castro, one for five hours, the
other for fourteen hours. A variety of subjects were covered including
the role of Red China in world politics, the Cuban economy, and Cuba's
role in Latin America. In discussing any subject Castro came around
to relating it to Castro's plan for developing Cuba. Castro finds the
Soviet Union useful, but Cuba under Castro he claims will never become
a Soviet satellite. He emphasized that the Cuban role in Latin America
depended upon Cuba's viability rather than the export of subversion.
4. Donovan has the confidence of Castro, who believes that
Donovan is sincere and direct with no official ties to the United States
Government. Our debriefing of Donovan is continuing.
JOHN A. McCONE
Director
13-00000
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D. С.
MEMORANDUM FOR: The President
SUBJECT:
15 APK 1505
Donovan Negotiations with Castro
1. James Donovan returned from Cuba yesterday after a four-
day visit. As a result of talks with Castro, the Americans imprisoned
on the Isle of Pines are to be released on 22 April. During the intervening
period Castro will observe closely American policy toward Cuba and make
sure that the Red Cross deliveries are being concluded in good faith.
2. The main thrust of Donovan's discussion, however, was
political and can best be evaluated by a very confidential statement made
to Donovan by Doctor Vallejo, a close personal advisor of Castro who
was present at the meetings. Vallejo said Castro knew that relations
with the United States are necessary and Castro wanted these developed.
However, there are certain Cuban Government officials, communists,
who are strongly opposed, even more than certain people in the United
States. These officials are under close surveillance. They have no
great following in Cuba; but if they rebelled at this time, Cuba would be
in chaos. He believed that Donovan and Castro could work out a plan for
a reasonable relationship between the two countries.
3. Donovan had two sessions with Castro, one for five hours, the
other for fourteen hours. A variety of subjects were covered including
the role of Red China in world politics, the Cuban economy, and Cuba's
role in Latin America. In discussing any subject Castro came around
to relating it to Castro's plan for developing Cuba. Castro finds the
Soviet Union useful, but Cuba under Castro he claims will never become
a Soviet satellite. He emphasized that the Cuban role in Latin America
depended upon Cuba's viability rather than the export of subversion.
4. Donovan has the confidence of Castro, who believes that
Donovan is sincere and direct with no official ties to the United States
Government. Our debriefing of Donovan is continuing.
JOHN A. MCCONE
Director
OLC/GC/M.MISKOVSKY (15 APR 63)
SECRET
ETES ONLY.
ORIGINAL TO
PRESIDENT-15APR 63