14-00000
104-10185-10266
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECT
***'APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994: A
SCIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
FILE TITLE,
LITAMIL-91
Operations
50-6-105/3
Vol II
ACLUSIVE PATES: Mar 1963-6 Dec 196.3
CUSTODIAL UNIT/LOCATION:
CI/EXO
ADII
DELETIONS, IF ANY
None
DATE
:
29
7/10/781/10/78
20/7/78
21/7/78
1
211 11 21
14
12
ZAME. 78!
21578
1
1
Loper
Berk
Berk...
Lopez
BERK
OHLER BERK
Edavin J. Joge.
Chails Bek
Edwin juan Life
Chance Bach
Chas Bir
TELY AF TEL
ARCHIV
IMMEDIATEL
RETURN
RET
14-00000
ست
FORM
2-66
2593
CONFIDENTIAL
NOTICE
THIS FILE HAS BEEN PROCESSED AND RETIRED. DO NOT
ADD ANY DOCUMENTS TO THIS FOLDER. FORWARD CS
DOCUMENTS THAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN THIS FOLDER
TO RID/RPU GE-58.
NOTICE
CONFIDENTIAL
(7-13)
1
14-00000
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
DISPATCH
SUBIECT
Chief Western Hemisphere B
Chief of
Chief of Station Mexico Cit
Contact Reports -- Meetings with LITAMIL-9
PIRUMEN LITANIL-9
ACTION
There are attached two contact reports covering meetings with
LITAMIL-9 on 16 and 27 November 1963.
Attachment:
As stated
Distribution:
C/WHD w/att
2C/SAS w/act
2 COS WAVE w/att
2- Files
Cin/attle SAS/E
CROSS REFERENCE TO0
1/Encl
Willard C. CURTIS
Curtis
CS COPY
بات
DESPATON SYMACE AND NUMBER
ΗΝΑ 22588
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DATE
31:5/3
6 December 1963,
HCS FILE NUN
14-00000
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1994
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
n
:
IEDRANDUM FOR ΤΗΣ RECORD
SUBJEC
Lawrence
Meeting with LITAMIL-9, 16 November 1963
A meeting was held with LITVIL-9 from 2000 hours to 2239 hours, 16
November. The meeting took place at 3's home --pick-up was by car and B's
wife sat in back with L-9 -- he was introduced to her as "Señor Aguilar."
2. L-9 reported that on the afternoon of 16 Nov he was called by
ANLEO-3 who wanted to see him on a matter of importance. L-9 was cuite sur
prised to receive this call but told A-3 to "come over here now if you want
to," A-3 said he thought it would be better for the two to meet at the bar
of the Del Prado Hotel at about 1800 on 18 nov. L- asked 3 for instructions.
9 said that in view of the possibility that 1.-9's are shone might be tapped
or that A-3 might let word leak out that he had cortacted L-9, L-9 should in-
form Ambassador Hernandez Armas of the call -- it was agreed that 3 would con-
sult further on this matter and that the final decision would be relayed to him
on the evening of 17 November - L-9 would call B's hore and 3, in a short con-
versation would use the word Acapulco if the incident should be reported --
Fazatlan if not. (L-9 called as scheduled and the word Acapulco was used).
L-9 was advised to keep away from A-3 who was believed to be in town in
connection with his efforts to get his relatives out of Cuba. He was told not
to go to the Del Prado Monday night unless Armas insisted that he do so. He
should make every effort to avoid any encounter with A-3-- staying away from
his home as much as possible.
3.L-9 has some lingering suspicions about A-3-- said that back in Cuba
1-3 used to drive a Mercedes Denz 190-SL sports car, bright red, which he sold
to an officer in the Mexican Embassy - L-9 found this strange since the Mexican,
who had diplomatic status, could bring a new car into Cuba duty-free at much loss
than the going price for a used one on the local market. L-9 concluded from this
that there might be some sort of hanky-parky between 4-3 and the Mexican official.
4. L-9 reported further as follows:
a. He has seen a bit of Foració LORES Sanches of the Bellas Artes
Institute lately and has come to the conclusion that FLORES is 100%
in favor of the Castro regime. He arranged a meeting between Arb.
Hernandez Armas and Flores at the Hotel Caria Isabel on Thursday
14 Hov (we pickel this up on LIENCY). This had to do with an
exhibit of Mexican art in Cuba -- scheduled for January 1964. L-9
had earlier rade some arrangements to send Mexican paintings by
air to Cuba (also picked up on LIENVOY).
$117
Estil
On th Nov Mexican doctor
(ル
now in Mexi, reported that had on helotne Cuban
government and had, in the guise of hurricane relief, sold to Cuba
200,000 pesos worth of merchandise for caly 30,000 ревоз.
c. At the airport on 11 November L-9 33: the Cubana stewardess. Marta
speaking with a "imom gusano" (L-9 doesn't know him by name).
This "gusano" is often at the sirport
curly hair. (Couldn't be our
HMMA-77588
SEORE CS COPY
Print has
58-6-105/3
14-00000
SECRET
also co
bout the
has been trying to get to Ca
lack to the bassy a
his visa application, Fis name
TOPPIA PHOPZI 15 supicious of the Insrican tho has been con
tacting her about chances of going to Cuba. She said that he asked
ver hoy Mdel could be so foolish as to proclain himself openly.e
a arxist-Leninist and to state that Presid President Fennedy is illito
Teresa thinks this man is some sort of prozacateur, (de is the same
one mentioned in the last L-9 CR)
f. Dra. MACHADO has told Teresa not to have anything to do with
Silvano REYES Puentes without checking beforehand with her
Jose
CFERNUTEZ Roa (Inom as ROA) was working until the wee small hours
of the morning on the night of 14-15 Nov. (Cole work?)
h. PEREIRA's name is Paul,
1. Raul FEREIRA says he is going to get married in May in Cuba to a
girl who works in MINREX. When asked if this would be by proxy, he
said he would go to Cuba for the marriage but that his wife would
not subsequently come to Mexico. (This is an interesting tidbit --
it will be recalled that PERZIPA has been coming up on LIENVOY as
a possible homosexual.)
Eusedo AZCUE will be leaving for Cuba on 18 Nov. L-9 believes there is no
force in the world that can deter AZCIE from his determination to
return. A's wife is desperate, hates the thought of going to Cuba
but does want to see her chileren who are there. L-S overheard A
say in the office: "I've already started to fight, within a year
I'll be a prisoner in the Cabana Fortress" Said this on 15 Nov
k. Rosario CASTELLANOS, female, Mexican writer, was at the recent
Embassy party given oodatul in the honor of Alejo
CARPENTTER. She works at the C. where she has a responsible
position. She said that she had asked the semission of the Rector
CHAVEZ to go to Cuba. CHAVEZ turned her tom at which point she
said, "I quis," CHAVEZ then smoothed or ruffled feathers by
plaining that if she were to quit she would be acting in an un-
patriotic manner in a difficult situation since now that DIAZ Ordaz
is lined up for the Fresidency all future amointments will be of
people from the political rift and she would only create a vacancy
for a rightist.
1. A Cuban in town looking for a visa to return home to Cuba entered
the US six times illegally. His nare is Jaime BUSO Colina.gr.,
n. Embassador Hernandez Armas says that SENZIG thành can
Foreign Office was "very helpsul to the Cuban rbacent
negotiations about the release of Caban boats at Cosme.
n. On Wednesday 13 Nov at 1000 hours 1-9 overheard Rico RCIA telling
a man at the door of the Embassy that "there have been a lot of
problers with the couriers letely, efforts have been made to steal the
bouches."
SEBRET
14-00000
copysp
نو
SEDRE
o. At 1115 hours on Wednesday 6 Novemindez-
in his office with Manuel M
an interview
loa turned his radio
on and kept the volume very nich while the interview in
progress.
A French weran named he
stayin at the Hotel Presidente
room 705, attended the recent recent Embassy or in honor of CARPENTIER
Farty
A cuban (name-?) who went to the US about a month ago in a small
boat and who has in his possession an S Parole Form returned to
Cuba from Mexico on 16 November. He had arrit from the Enbassy.
party
r. Many people at the CARPENTIER Or were surprised to see..
Leopoldo
there - he had never been there before.
3. (Dolores de cora was shooting off at the mouth at the same party.
She called the Argentine journalist PCS over to her and said,
"Isn't it true that MARCUE blasted Crdaz purposely - to insure
Ma that he would get the PRI nomination. PUIGROS agreed. (This refers
1
to the issue of Politica which had a photo of DIAZ Ordaz on the
cover along with the words --lle will not be president). Dolores said
that DIAZ Ordaz is a good friend of her father and that her brother
will probably become a diputado in the new legislature. She said that
CIAZ line would be the same as LOPEZ Meteos' -- no problem.
t. Lately the Ambassador has been turning on loud music in his office.
(To cover conversations ?)
u. L-9 went to the Soviet Embecsy party celebrating the October
Revolution - 7 Nov.
A
L-9 took the pouch to the airport Friday (8 Nov-?). He was
accompanied by Rogelio. He turned the pouch over to the "sobrecargo"
(steward) on the Cubana plane. Had picked it un just inside the door
of the Embassy. (Test mission?)
w. The planned exhibition of Cuban engravings at San Luis Potosi did not
come off for reasons not fully clear -- some administrative SHAFU.
L-9 is now planning to set upan bibit at Guadalajara.
5. B-informed L-9 that he would be on vacation from about 2 December until
Christvastime - said that he could put 1-9 in touch with another officer during
this period or could put the operation on ice with an emergency rail channel left
open. 4-9 said that he nuch preferred to put it on ice, does not want to be ex-
posed to any more people. For the first time he showed same concern about
finances -- said that he might go to Cuba for Christmas and would like to have
some money available to do some shoppin; beforestata 140 needs to pay
the next six-months adtance rent for his apartan Jecember. He plained that
when he goes to Cuba he hopes to take many gift has all along been sending
packages to his sister-in-law and feels that this is good insurance in several
ways, especially since it suits her to have a source of supply in Mexico -- hence
L-9 would probably be left alone and allowed to remain in Mexico. For his rent
be will need six times 650 pesos or 3,900 pesos. It is planned to pay him his
ovember and Decer.ber salary plus a year-end bondin B647entes pay (as, per
local custon) at the next meeting thus 2005
enable him to pay his rent, do his all
to Cuba for Christmas. If he does he will spend about 3 weeks there.
SEGRET
14-00000
SECRET
also my
innet
1-9 made it clear that if he does go to Cuba he (as last year)
does not want to take any Sw material or have any contact with KUBARK people
inside, He will, of course, keep his eyes and ears open and make as many
interesting contacts as possible. It is felt that we could be foolish to
insist that he undertake any rission" inside in view of his outright refusal
last time to take any Sw materials. A good briefing and debriefing should do
the job. It would do him no harm to renew scquaintances inside Cuba and a true
vacation would probably do him a lot of good.
7. Next meeting: Open.
Law F. Barker
Add: No heart-to-heart motivation-boosting session was required at
this encounter -- other than being a hit shaken by the AMLED-3
phone call, L-9 was in a good mood and not noticeably nervous.
3's wife remarked on 18 Nov that "Aguilar" was quite nervous
when he got into the car at the pick-up point.
SEORET
14-00000
SECRET
18 November 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE ROOORD
FROH
Lawrence F. Barker
SUBJECT : f.ddendum to CR covering meeting with LITANTL-9, 16 Nov 1963
LITATL-9 reported the following additional informatio
Ralph 3.Strin, an American citizen holding passport 551033,
residing at 1510 3. 52nd Street, Chicago, Illinois, left
Chicago Tuesday 12 Movsiber and came to Mexico via Cenada where
he obtained a Cuban visa at the Curen Consulate in Toronto.
He arrived in Mexico on the night of 15 November and stayed et
the Hotel Agnes. He visited the Cuban Enbassy on the morning of
16 November and was due to fly to Cuba the same day. The Cuban
Embassy paid 23.50 excess baggage charges for hia (3 Cy).
Stein is an engineering draughtsman and speaks Italian. He left
a postcard with 1-9 to be nailed to:
A
Shirl Linde
1510 E. 52nd Street
Chicago, Illinois
U.S.A.
Message:
Dear Shirl & Clint
In a few minutes I leave !!.C. When I get
settled I will write from... ... Tieve both
of you very much.
Ralph
Laurence F. Barker
* furnicu leg Canadian facilie als wit
Wined intichte Shine jisbilly candid
:
SECRET
50-500-4/1
14-00000
SECRET
23 November 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
FROM
:
SUBJECT:
Lawrence F. Barker
Meetings with LITAL-9, 23 and 27 Novenber 1963
1. Ca the night of 23 November L-C contected Darker by phone and
a meeting was held from 2130 to 2230 hours. L-7's reason for making the
contact was to express his condolences for the recent assassination of
President Kennedy. It res clear that L-S vas badly shaken up by this
happening - when he spoke of Mrs. Jacqueline Kennedy his eyes clouded up
with tears.
2. 1-9 was asked if he had ever seen Cano. Had he ever heard
that Oswald visited the Cuban Embassy in Fexico -- no. Did he know anyone
in the Cuban Embassy that knew Oswald or knew anything about him -- no.
at this time Cilvisyren was in the hards of thevican police but L-9
was obviously unaware of her detention). Asked that the reaction of those
Inside the Embassy was to the news of the President death, L-9 said that
he had heard very little talk about it, that the Saturday morning staff
meeting was a short, perfunctory affair, but that just about everyone seened
to be truly shocked. He had heard no one expressing pleasure about the
Killing. He said that this reinforced his belief that once Fidel Castro
falls, the Cuban people, even many of those who are now classified as
tria o "uerte types, will quickly show themselves to be essentially good
people and essentially US-oriented.
3. 1-9 was asked to report on the aftermath of his conversation with
assador Armas about the phone call - had received from 0-3 and thich,
in the interests of security, it was decilled, with 3 and MVE assent, that
-9 shoul: report to Amas. L-9 said that this wont very smoothly -- that
Amas aparently did not recognize AMF-3 when he was rentioned -- L-9
Frely stated that he had received a call from Captain (Surname), that the
Contain ented 1-9 to come to see him at the Del Prado, that iny felt that
this was somehat suspicious and told the Captain that it he wanted to see
2-9 he shot! come to L-9's home. Armas told 1-9 that he had done the richt
thing - that he should not go ont raking mysterious meetings with people in
hotels. - did not press the point but he believed that Armas thought that
the captain mentioned was a Cubana airline pilot. Anyway, his shirts are
clean should the question ever come we his having been contacted by -3
: ponto the contact to his imbassador. -? rorkol afternnis that he
really neted to brush off A-3 as the two familre very close in Cuba.
4.
nother meeting was held fror 2100 to 22 on 27 November. Sy this
time the amest of Silviaran tas public knowledge and L-9 made it his
first toric for scussion. said that Silvia vas back in the Embassy
ca Monday the 25th and said that she had been held for 6 hours by the Federal
Police. She seemed to be quite please ith her performence -- said she kept
reminding the police that Mexico is a country and that the constitution
cuaranteed her freedom from such persecution. Co this the police just laurhed
and said that the constitution woulen och good in jeil, she had
hotter cooperate if she wanted to get יי. מוסly admitted that she had
on in the Consulate, that he came
lad ene the request (this seems 1 to the effect that
swald coul: not be issued a transit, visa en rouse to the EUR less and
a visa but that Cuba
14-00000
SECRET
until he received a USSR visa. She said that, the cops had threatened her
with extradition to the US (seers unlikely) whereupon she said she would be
had to go to the US to face Oswald. She said that complaints would be rade
to Fresident LOVE Cateos through (L-9 does not know who
ANGREZ is or what his access to IX is) Silvia said that she was quite sur-
prised that word of her arrest was relayed to Red VARICIO Nogales so fast
by who flashed the word by 2300 hours 23 Nov. At this point
Teresa PC, one of the crowd listening to Silvia tell her tele, ordered
her nephew to leave -- said, "we don't want you around here." All in all,
Silvia thought she did a good job of standing up to the police. L-9 repeated,
as he has done before, that she is a very intelligent, quick-witted girl.
She did not appear to have been rougher in any way or to have suffered from
her "ordcal."
5. L-9 had nothing more to offer on the urody assassination - was
again shom a photo of Oswald - never saw the or. He said that there is
not much talk around the Embassy about the killing - perhaps because no
one is expected to approve of such a thing yet at the same time no one wants
to make too much fuss about it for fear of being spected as pro-American.
6. L-9 reported on other matters as follows:
a.
The Counselor of the Soviet Enbassy (no nare given) came to
the Cuban Embassy at about 1045 Monday 25 November. He spoke
with Dra. Margot KCHADO The Ambassador was not present at the
time.
b. Inc. Jorgetpro was in the Embassy on Monday 25 November.
He remarked that he had been to see 17 Ordaz some time ago
about getting a permit to send his son to Cuba to see the heart
specialist Dr. Enrique CAMA. ('s son suffers from some heart
ailment). DLAZ Ordaz questioned closely about the projected
trip (this was while Xe Minister of Government) and I took
advantage of the occasion to complain to Do thet reple from the
procuraduria had confiscated some medical slides from a Cuban
heart specialist at theirport. (L-as the person who eventually
recfovered these slee). Accorbay to T, DO was somewhat upset,
said that the procuradura people had no business doing this,
and saw to it that the shiles were burned. T said that DO
mentioned L-9 by name, telling ? that he would see to it that
an order was issued for the slities to be turned over to L-9.
T passed word aromi the ban mbassy that everyone should be
very careful to speak only the best of DO who might prove to
be a useful friend.
c. A meeting a Consular offers from all Cuban Consulates was held
on Tuesday. 1-9 does not no shot went on at this meeting.
7. 1-9 was paid 12,000 pesos - 1,000 each for the months of Hov and
Dec plus 4,000 yeer-end bonus. He was told that the C/O would be out of
tom Juring most of December and he reiterated his desire to have the operation
put on ice during the intrin -- he is not arious to be "expose?" to any more
people. Arrangements were made for en smergency como charnel to him in case
it might become necessary for us to contact in wing the C/'s absence.
Letails on next page.
8. L-? asked 3 to buy him sare sil paints in the US -- said that the
Mexican product is inferior. ill. 1-9 is doing a lot more painting
these days. He is now putting the Naishing toutes on an oil painting
14-00000
DISPATCH
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
TO
Chief, WH Division
INFO
FROM
SUBJECT
Chief, SAS; Chief of Station, JMWAVE
Chief of Station, Mexico City
Contact Reports -- Meetings with LITAMIL-9
ACTION REQUIRED REFERENCES
PERUMEN LITAMIL-9
There are attached three contact reports covering meetings with
LITAMIL-9 on 15 October, 26 October, ac November 1963.
Attachment:
Contact Report
Distribution:
C/WHD w/att
2C/SAS w/att
2 COS WAVE w/att
2- Files
Cin/attle SAS/E
CROSS REFERENCE TO
1/Encl
Willard C. CURTIS
Curtis
CS COPY
بات
DESPATON SYMACE AND NUMBER
ΗΝΑ 22588
CLASSIFICATION
SECRET
DATE
31:5/3
6 December 1963,
HCS FILE NUN