14-00000
104-10219-10093
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
G. ISFID page 5 paragraph 33(2), Subject's acquaintance
Tamara ECLODOVA and her husband Vasiliy NERASOV. There are no traces
on HOLOOCA or NEPASOW.
H. ISPID page 7, paragraph 104, Subject's acquaintance Lev
There are no traces on GROCOWSKIY.
page 7, paragraph 103, Subject's acquaintance
There are no traces on
GROZOWSATY.
I. ISPI
Tatyana ZAREDSKAYA.
*ZAREDSKAYA, Tatyana
SEX: F
DOB: C1929
PO3: USSR, Moscow
CIT: USSR
CCC:
Dentist
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Known to 201-926536. Subject is a dental surgeon. She is
Jewish and a Party zember. Now married to her second husband Petr LMU.
She is considering enigrating.
J. ISPKD page 8, paragraph 10D, Subject's acquaintance Galina
SERGEYEVA. There are no traces on
*SERGEYEVA, Galina
SEX:
DOB:
F
C1952
POB: USSR, Moscow
CIT: USSR
OCC: Secretary
Known to 201-926536. Former MFA secretary. Divorced from a
foreign black student. Has been arrested for black market dealings.
K. ISPKD page 8, paragraph 10E, Subject's second cousin)
Sofiya SHURINA. There are no traces on
: 08
*SHURINA, Sofiya
SEX: F
DUB: C1550
POB: USSR.
CIT: USSR
OC: Music teacher
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Known to 201-926535. Piano teacher. Black marketeer. Has a
large circle of friends among diplomats and foreign students.
14
SECRET
21
SECRET
L. ISPKD page 9, paragraph 10F, Subject's acquaintance Lev
Danovich MIPMAN. There are no traces on MIRON. As of April 1971
the chief of U350 in Moscow was one B. Ye. SAMAREKO.
M. ISPKD page 9, paragraph 10G, Subject's acquaintance
Anatoliy FISH. There are no traces on
*FISH, Anatoliy
SEX: M
DOB:
C1940
POR: USSR
CIT: USSR
OCC: Engineer
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Κηση το 201-926536. Construction engineer for research
institute. Grad of Kuybyshev Building Institute. An extremely anti-
Soviet Jew, he wants to enigrate.
N. ISPKD page 9, paragraph 10H, Subject's acquaintance
There are no traces on
Svetlana KALMAN.
*KALMAN, Svetlana
SEX:
F
DOB:
C1914
POB: USSR
CIT: USSR
OCC: Model
LOC: USSR
Known to 201-925536.
Well-known mannikin at Models' House.
Unmarried. Knows many foreigners. Mother works for Intourist.
sa
03
Jameson)
Lisa Jarason
SB/SA
03
SASADS -Daniel Cantley)
Distribution:
Orig. IP/AN (classify into 201-926536, ZR ANTONOV to 201-857957,
ZR MOISEYEV to 201-969939, index all asterisked names.)
1 SB/CCPS (via AD/SB/COPS/SA)
1
SB/USSR
1 - SB/SI/I
Sterile Distribution:
1- SB/X/EU
1- FBI (Part one only)
1
SBSA/DS chrono
1 DCD (Part one only)
15
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
SX-23312
29 August 1974
NEORADIUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Internal Supplement to Preliminary Knowledgeability
Debriefing of Soviet Enigre Irina Mihaylovna LIPKINA
The following information was made available by Subject,
Irira Mikhaylora LIPKINA, in response to inquiries based on
Part i! of the Debriefing Guide. This information is for internal
use only.
1. FOREIGN CONTACTS/ACQUAINTANCES WHILE IN THE SOVIET UNION:
A. Viktor (LNU) is a guest of the Soviet Goverment, a
scholarship sacent at Moscow State University (CU). A black
African fron Nigeria, where his father sill resides, Viktor (aka
Victer) is married to a Soviet woman about 27 years old who is an
instructor in the English faculty of CJ. Viktor himself is probably
in his early thirties. Viktor traveis a lot on journalistic
assigments; Subject dian't know whether Viktor's journalistic jobs
are performed for Soviet press organs or foreign periodicals. Subject
recalis Victor claims to have relatives in the United States. Victor's
wife, whose name Subject could not remember, should have had a baby
about six or seven months ago, i.e. in about January or February 1974.
Victor hates living in the Soviet Union; he feels persecuted because
of racial discrizination against himself and, especially against his
wife for having carried a Negro. He fears for the fate of his culatto
baby. As soon as he can arrange to get her out of the country with hin,
he intends to settle in England, where he allegedly has coney in the
bark, placed there by his father from Nigeria. Subject could not
provide even approximate dates when Viktor may have originally arrived
in the USSR.sject believes Vitor is still 2 Nigerian citizen.
B. Bill (presumably Willian) MARTIN:
212338
Subject said she had been told by her cousin Sofiya SHRES
and a friend Igor ERENBURG that MARTIN had been an American spy who
arrived in Moscow about 1965. His espionage activities were allegedly
discovered by the KGB, who interrogated and broke him. Through
interrogation, the AGB was able to "double" him back against the
Americans. Under the debriefer's queries as to why the KGB would have
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
use for a doubled American agent in bacon, Subject replied she
dida' zxerstand why Martin could be a valuable double agent, rerely
she had been told he was.
When Martin first arrived in Moscow, circa 1965, he was
about 32 years old. He is now at least forty, although he looks
somewhat younger. He is about 6 feet, three inches tall with very
short bis hair, a rourd, freckiai face, blue eyes, and an average
build. He is wrarried, reportedly has no employment, and resides
in a large apartment building near the embassy district in Moscow.
C. Subject vas acquainted with ERIC (LU), a mathematician
and member of the French tean at the Serpukhov atomic center. Eric
and Subject's husband were engaged in speculation in icons.
D. Subject net several other foreign rationals with whom
her husband traded in foreign currency, icons, objets d'art, but
could not renenter any additional details about then which are not
covered in debriefings of her husband.
2. PELATIVES, FRIENDS, AND ACQUAINTANCES WHO OCCUPY POSITIONS
OF INTELLIGENCE INTEREST OR TRAVEL ABROAD ON FCS OR TDI RASIS:
A. See separate SX necro No. 23524 on Alla and Danya LNU,
probably identifiable as Alla ani Kim Aklmedovich KOSHEV. Koshev is
second secretary of the Soviet Embassy in Aman, Jordan.
B. See separate SX ceco No. 23628 on Sergey MANESHIN,
physicist, employed in a scientific research institute under the
auspices of Moscow State University.
C. See separate SX zero No. 23642 on Galina Davidovna
BABUSHKINA, Soviet hairdresser and judge of international competitions,
and her husband, Leonid BABUSHKIN, an oral surgeon.
D. See separate SX reme No. 23635 on Subject's half-brother
Leonid MOGILEVSKIY, now a resident of Vienna, Austria, as well as
information on Mogilevskiy in Paragraph 14B of the Preliminary
Knowledgeability Debriefing of Subject.
E. See separate SX caro 30. 25695 on Subject's first cousins
Leonid Khayzovich and Grigoriy haymovich SOKOLOVSKIY, a physicist and
an aviation engineer respectively, both of whom are imvolved in secret
work.
2
SECRET
F. See separate SX reco. 23791 on Nella CPLCVA,
journalistployed in the American section of the Novosti Press
Аделсу (АРК) in Moscow.
G. See separate SX meme No. 23702 on Mikhail FOSTAROEK,
Izvestiya correspondent, and his wife, Irina MikhaylaTA POSTOK,
a teacher or Russian literature in a closed military institute.
H. Subject identified the following additional persons
occupy positions of intelligence interest, who serve abroad, or
who travel to the West. In the cases of those persons described below,
there was insufficient information from Subject or insufficient apparent
vulnerabilities to justify separate SX reporting.
(1) Yelena pru BYSTRITSKAYA, a rather well-brown Soviet
film actress who was born about 1954 in Moscow. One of her famous roles
was in the fila of Sholokhov's novel "Tikhii Don" (Quiet Flows the Don).
Subject met Eystritskaya through her twin sister Vera DLUGHA in about
1968. At the time, Subject's sister was working in Moscow as an
crderly at the dental polyclinic near the Dzerzhinskiy metro station,
rot far from the Ministry of Foreign Trade. This polyclinic serves
rany Soviets who travel abroad ployees of the Ministry of Foreign
Trade, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and, Subject assumes, the KGB.
Systritskaya was able to have her teeth fixed there as she is married
to a Soviet diplomat, ICCR INJ. Subject is certain he has a different
surname than his wife's who has retained hers throughout their marriage.
Igor's current assignment is to a high diplomatic post in the Soviet
Embassy in Paris. Subject believes he holds the rank of counselor.
About 50 years old, Igor was born in Moscow. He is tall, on the thin
side, with grey hair, and a distinguished looking face. He left for
his PCS assignent in Paris in 1975. Subject believes Igor completed
the Institute of Foreign Trade (not further identified by Subject)
in Moscow. Bystritskaya has not accompanied her husband on his tours.
abroad as she has her own film career to pursue in Moscow. She did
travel with hin on vacation to France in about 1968 or 1969; her
husband speaks fluent French. Bystritskaya is a totally apolitical
person who is interested only in her career; basically she has a good
heart. Both Bystritskaya and Igor are Party members.
(2) Aleksey pru Inu and Galina pu lau: This couple
lived as of October 1975 on the 9th floor of house number three, korpus
three, on ulitsa 25 Bakinskikh Komissarov in Moscow, where Subject
and her husband resided from 1970 through 1975. The husband, ALEISEY,
is a Dagestani Dagestanets) rational, who is a Professor of Cardiology
in an important medical institute on Pirogov street. He was born about
1959. His wife, GALINA, born in Moscow in about 1946, is a Russian national.
3
SECRET
She is also a physician and works in the same medical institute as does
her jusband. Subject doesn't believe either of then are Party members
and both are extremely anti-Swist. They raintain a large colicction of
foreign books, both in Russian and other languages, in their apartment.
They buy and sell these books on the black market and sreculate in
diaron's and illegally-procured foreign goods as well. Subject observed
an English-language history of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
published, Subject thinks, in America, in their book collection.
The caple has a 1-1/2 year cid daughter, Vasha (Mariya).
(3) LINA (LNU), probably carently erployed in the Near
Eastern department of the Noiesti Press Agency in Moscow. Subject met
Lina when Subject was employed as a master hairdresser at Salon Nurber
Five on ulitsa Kazitskaya in Moscow, which is located near the APN
building from 1967-69. Lina was one of Subject's clients there and
contirisi to have Subject do her hair when Subject roved to Salon
Number Six on ulitsa Medvedeva. Never married, LLNA was born about
1939; she is a Fussian national. From about 1966-71, she served as
secretary to Danya pnu Inu (possibly identifiable as Kim Akhmedovich
KOSHEV), who was then a political attache in the Soviet Embassy in
Damascus. when she returned to Moscow, she began working in the Near
Eastern section of Novosti, bet told Subject in 1972 that she expected
to be sent abroad again to a Soviet embassy, probably in the Middle East.
About 5'4" in height, Lina is szocky and plump, with short reddish hair
teased high on her head, green eyes, a straight nose, and a round face.
A simple, uncomplicated persca, Lina's interests are food, good
restaurants, good times, liquer, and her cany lovers, most of whom are
in the Soviet diplcratic community. Lina comes from a worker's family
and probably has only a secondary educatica.
(4) Gennadiy pra ANTONOV (Subject is not absolutely
sure of his surname; Antonov was as approximate as she could come).
Subject and her sister occupied Antonov's apartment on Kholturinskaya
ulitsa near the Preobrazhenskoye retro station off and on for a year in
about 1959-70. At the time, Antonov was serving in economic affairs in
the Soviet Embassy in Madrid. Subject believes his tour there was from
1968 until 1973. Antonov is a close friend of Subject's half-brother
Leonid Mikhavlovich GILEUSKTY 'sce SX-25-35) :ho arranged for his
sisters w join Antonov's mother Mariya Ivanovna in the large 4-reon
apartment while Antonov was away. Subject met Antonov once in 1970
when he was on home leave in Moscow. Subject described him as about
average height and weight, with dark brown short hair, and square-rimmed
glasses. Subject puts Antonov's approxirate date of birth as 1939.
Antonov's wife, who accompanied hin to Madrid, is tall and fat. Subject
doesn't remember her name. The couple have a daughter, possibly named
Natasha, who would be about nine years old today. The daughter was not
with her parents in Spain. Subject thinks she learned from her brother
that Anterov finished the Institute of Foreign Relations (CMO) under the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where he stuited English, among other
languages. He is a careerist Party her who follows the straight
and narrex ideological path, at least on the surface. Antonov's father
4
SECRET
perished during World War II. Subject is certain her half-trother
Megilevskiy can supply mich additional information on Antorov.
(5) Lev BARYAN, a 15-year-old Armenian, is the Director
of the "Charodeyka" beauty salon, located on Kalinin Prospest in Moscow.
According to Subject, de Charodeyiz is one of the two cost fashionable
beauty salons in Mosco. Subject became acquainted with Aryan
through her mother, wo worked as a cashier at the Charodeyka salon
from 1970 to 1973. Arsaryan is the personal barter of Alt isey KCSYGEV,
Chairman of the USSR Comcil of Ministers. He constantly goes to
Kosygin's apartment to cut his hair. Ambaryan has also traveled abrced
on several occasions ring the past few years to compete in and judge
international barber competitions, primarily those held in socialist
cantries. In addition to Kesygin, Ambaryan has other clients within
the top rank of the Party and government, whose hair he cuts in their
private apartrents. Of average height, Ambaryan looks like a typical
Arzenian he is pl with black curly hair, black eyes, and an olive
complexion. His wife, Tamara AMBARYAN, is about 40 years old, and also
works as a barber (for men) at the Charodeyka salon.
3. ARRESTS AND POSSIBLE KGB PELATIONSHIPS:
A. Subject claims she was never arrested.
B. Subject identified the following individuals as
KGB-affiliated:
(1) Subject's neighbors on the first floor of house
number three, korpus three on ulitsa 26 Bakinskikh Kormissarov in Moscow,
who occupied, she believes, apartment number 330, were a couple named
Таnуа (Тачузna) and ANATOLIY (LAU). Subject considers Tança an informer
(stukach) for the KGB. Officially, Tanya works somewhere on the
Ploshchad Nagina. Her husband, Anatoliy (Tolya) is the son of an
irportant Party man who is the Head of a trust. The father gets good
joos for Anatoliy. Anatoliy was in Iran from about 1972-73 a5 2
translator; he speaks English and some French. Subject opined he probably
worked for the KGB there. although he was officially under the auspices
of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. When he returned to Moscow in
about 1975, his father got him a job as a construction engineer in a
scientific research institute (otherwise identified). Subject
believes the couple has many friends who work in or around the KG3.
(2) Subject was formerly well-acquainted with Tamara
KALOKUVA (raiden name), who worked in Subject's last place of
exployment as a master hairdresser from 1967-72. (The Salon Number Cre
on Kuznetsky Most in Moscow). Born about 1946 in Moscow and a Pussian
national, Kholodova is a Farty activist who held positicas of importance
in the Komsomol Committee of the Dzerzhinskiy rayon. In about 1971,
5
SECRET
she carried the chauffeur of one of the top Party men in the CPSU,
a man Subject believes is named Vasiliy PASO er her carriage
she landed a job in the beauty salon of the Intarist Hotel, which
caters only to foreigners. Through her om connections, Colccova
obtained a position as chauffeur for her husband at the Soviet Enbassy
in Stockholm. The couple departed together for Sweden about a year ago,
in the sumer of 1975. Subject believes that both Kholodova and her
husband report to the C3. Sutject's husband believes MENUSOV is a
AGB officer. Zoth of these people were described by Subject as faithful
Communists and good Party srbers.
C. See Paragraph 13 above for information on Bill MARTIN,
whan Subject heard was an American spy who had been doubled by the KGB.
4. DISSIDENCE INFORMATION:
Subject was never involved in any dissident activities in the
Soviet Union. She had no interest in unxierground literature (samizdat)
and never read any, nor did the ever reci Russian-language tocKS
published abroad. It is unlikely Subject would have read such raterial
or participated in dissident activities even had she had the chance to do
so, as Subject and her husband disdained the efforts of the Soviet
dissidents as foolish and pointless. Subject herself has only a secondary
education and limited mentality. She is not interested in ideological
matters and is an apolitical person. It is highly doubtful Subject
read much of anything, forbidden or otherwise.
5. INFORMATION CONCERNING SOVIET NATIONALISM FROBLES:
None. Subject has difficulty differentiating between the
various minority rationalities of the Soviet Union and tends to lump
certain of them together under convenient generic terms, such as
"Siriytsy" (Syrians) for Soviets of Turkic or other Moslen nationality
descent. Subject hai no interest in the plight of minority rationalities
in the USSR. She recognized it was her Jewish ancestry which helped
her to emigrate legally from the USSR, but that is as far as it went.
6. COMMENT CONCERNING FOREIGN RADIO BROADCASTS TO THE SOVIET UNION:
Not covered in this debriefing. Subject never mentioned listening
to foreign radio, even in passing.
7. CRIME IN THE SOVIET UNION:
Subject apparently was not personally involved in criminal
activities in the Soviet Union, but she was well aware of her husband's
continual black market operations. Subject's husteni dealt successfully
6
SECRET
in speculation in icons, gens, gold, objets d'art, and fertim arrency,
and occasionally bought and resold marijuana and hashish alice these
activities are considered criminal acts in the USSR. Details of
Subject's husband's activities ray be found in his debriefings. See
especially SX-23634 on Subject's husband's knowledge of Soviet black
market activities, and Menoranim for the Pecord, dated 30 May 1974 in
Subject's husband's 201-922053.
8. INFORMATION PERTAINES TO SOVIET MAIL CENSORSHIP PROCEDURES:
No infomation.
9. ANCALEDGEABILITY PECARDING KGB MODUS OPEREDI SELE USSR:
None.
10. IDENTIFICATION OF CHER SOVIETS WHO MAY BE OF POSSIBLE OPS
INTEREST:
In addition to those individuals covered above in paragraphs
two and three, Subject was debriefed on the following Soviet personalities
who may be of marginal operational interest.
A. Lev GPOZOVSKIY: Grozovskiy is the Director of the Dental
Polyclinic near the Dzerzhinskoye metro station in central Moscow.
This clinic is located near the building of the Soviet Ministry of Foreign
Trade and is frequented by many Soviet officials who travel abroad and
their families (cf. Paragraph 24(1) above en Bystritskaya). Crocerskiy,
as director of the polyclinic, is very krocwledgeable on its clientele.
Himself an oral surgeon (stomatolog), Grozovskiy is about 55 years old
and a Jew. Subject met hin through her brother Leonid MGILEVSKIY who
is a stomatologist by training. Grozovskiy is a Party mercer. His
daughter, Liliya, is also a stomatologist and is rarried to a construction
engineer named Lev LVU. In order to supplement his income, Grozovskiy
does private dental work on the side (na levo).
B. Tatyana ZAREDSKAYA is another stomatologist employed
at the dental polyclinic described above. About 45 years old, she is
Jewish and a Party menber, born in Moscow. Her first husband, whose
surname she still uses, was Yevgeniy ZAREDSKIY, who worked at the sme
clinic as a dental technologist. her second husband, Fein (w) is an
architect, who is also a Party menber. Zaredskaya, as of October 1973,
was considering applying to legally emigrate from the Soviet Union.
Also involved in werk "on the side", Zaredskaya averaged five rubles
per tooth in her illegal private practice. Officially, a dentist gets
only one ruble for filling a tooth.
7
SECRET
C. LINA Coru Inu) and VIITOR (1) occa 7th
floor apartment in the building where Subject resided until her
departure from the Soviet Union -- house caree, korpusee, ulitsa
26 Bakirskikh Xomissarev in Moscow. This couple is Jewish and are both
Candidates of Science. Subject believes their field of expertise is
physics. They both work in the same very secret installation identified
only by post office tcx. Subject does not know the muter nor the location
of this installation. Both fron Moscow, the husband Viktor is about
42 years old, his wife about 40. They have an eleven-year-old son
nanad Zhenya (Yevgeniy). Viktor apparently reads English and understarxis
spoken. English to an extent. He is tall and dark, with a solid will.
She looks like a typical Armenian with short dark curly hair, dark eyes,
and a deep olive complexion.
D. Galira SERGEYEVA, corn in 1952 in Moscow, came from
a poor worker's family. In 1970, when she was 18, she got a job in the
department of administration for Soviet foreign correspondents in the
Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Working in a menial capacity there,
she received a neager salary of less than eighty rubles per month, and in
order to supplement her income, became involved in illegal black market
foreign currency deals. She began sleeping around with black students
at Lumamba University) (FFU) from whom she received foreign currency
(valuta). She used this to make transactions in the foreign currency
stores. In 1971, when she was only nineteen, she was apprehended by
the police (CAD) who took her to the Petrovka. She received a two-year
sentence which forbade her to travel anywhere outside of the environs
of Moscow. She lost her job at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and
got a job as a secretary in some establishment in Moscow Colast'. In the
neantime, she married one of the black students she had been sleeping
with. Subject doesn't know his name. He finished his term at Lunsba
about 1-1/2 years ago and sought to return home. As she was forbidden
to leave Moscow by virtue of her criminal record, he divorced her and
returned to Africa alone. Despondent, Galina proceeded to begin
sleeping around again with other black students and diplomats and
dealing in foreign currency exchanges once again. Subject described
Galina as a plain-looking girl.
E. Sofiya SHURINA is Subject's second cousin on Subject's
mother's side. She is 24-years-old, a graduate of the pedagogical
faculty of a technicom, where she specialized in music. She then
completed the Pedagogical Institute imeni Lenin by studying evenings
and received a dipleza in 1975. She currently teaches pizno in a
music school. Unmarried, Shurina has a large circle of friends among
diplomats and foreign students. She is also involved in black market
operations.
-
8
SECRET
F. Lev Cancvich RAW, a Jew, about 50 years of age,
is a Party merber and head of the UBND (browleriye ovog Karamal'
nego Cosluchivaniya - Administration of Commal Living Services) cf
the Moscow Corispolkom. He is a close friend of Subject's brother
Leonid Mogilevskiy. His son, Valeriy MISMAN (see reporting in Subject's
husband's 201) was a blacketeer and pip who was arrested in 1973
and is now serving a 15-year sentence in the prison for especially
dangerous criminals in LGVSK. A talented, proper, faithful servant
of the Party, the senior Mirzan lost his job as Deputy head of a large
combine when his son was arrested.
G. Aratoli FISH is a construction engineer in an overt
scientific research institute. About 54 years old, he finished the
Building Institute imeni Kaybyshev. He is extremely anti-Soviet and,
as a Jew, wants to enigrate from the Soviet Union. He works with inu
ZAREDSKIY, the cousin of the stomatologist ZAREDSKAYA described above in
paragraph 10B.
H. Svetiara KAL'MAN is a famous Soviet model who works
in the so-called Models' House (don modeley) on Kalinin prospekt.
She is beautiful and a rather famous rannikin. Now about 30 years old,
she is urcarried, but has frequent love affairs, many of which are with
foreigners. An ethnic Russian, her father died during World War II.
Her mother used to work for Intourist and possibly still does. Kal'ran's
nother is a Party member, but the model is not.
11. ELICITATION FROM SOURCE OF OTHER POSSIBLE ENVIGRE SOURCES
OF PI AND OPS LEADS INTEREST:
Subject, as did her husband, constantly referred to her half-
brother Leonid MUGILEVSKIY as a tremendous source of information on the
Soviet black market and high-level govermental and Party corruption.
For additional information on Mogilevskiy, see SX-25655 and paragraph
14B of the Preliminary Knowledgeability Debriefing of Subject.
12.
DEBRIEFER'S ASSESSMENT OF EMIGRE:
Subject is a woman of limited education and limited intellectual
capabilities. She is not politically motivated and ated living in the
USSR not because of its political system, but because she couldn't get
what she wanted in a raterial sense. She strikes me as being frivolous
and flight and probably would have no compunctions about fidelity to her
husband should the appropriate opportunity for an extra-marital liaison
arise. She is obviously lazy and uninformed about many things. She
appeared to know even less accut the structure of the Soviet government,
Party, educational system, and society than did her debriefer. She
probably read very little of anything in the USSR and, in America, will
probably devote most of her attention to the television set. She is
impressed with names and money the only questions she asked me as her
debriefer were in regard to the latest fashions, and who was sleeping
9
SECRET
with whom in the "jet set" -- she seemed particularly fascinated by
Jackie Onassis. As her intellectual and academic abilities are
severely licited, it was not surprising that Subject got confused
about places of work, geographical locations, nationalities, etc.
At one point, when I was trying to find out the country of assignment
of a Soviet diplomat she knew, she asked me to raze all the countries
of Euro. when I got to Spain she said "ah, that's it!"
Nevertheless, there was no suspicion in my mind that Subject
was lying. She may have exaggerated or stretched the truth at times
in order to please ne and encourage me to continue the debriefing
farther (in order for her, to earn zore money), but I do consider that
what she said was basically true as she understood it.
As far as CI apprehensions are concerned, I personally feel
Subject is too limited intellectually to be used effectively by any
intelligence service and I doubt the KGB would have picked her out to
penetrate the enigration.
13. POSSIBLE ENLISTMENT OF SUBJECT'S ASSISTANCE TO FURTHER OPS
LEAD RECRUTEMENT EFFORT:
This was not even broached with Subject, and I don't think
it ever should be.
14. TRACES ON INDIVIDUALS MENTIONED IN THE PRELIMINARY
ROWLEDGEABILITI DEBRIEFING:
A. PXD page 2, paragrach 9-C, Subject's instructor at the
hairdressing school Nina Fedorovma IVANOVA. There are no traces on IVANOVA.
B. PKD page 4, paragraph 3, Galina Davidovna BABUSHKINA.
See SX-23642 dated 30 July 1974 for traces and additional AESHYLOCK/2
information on BABUSHKINA.
C. PKD page 4, paragraph 4, Alla MANESHINA. See SX-23628, dated
23 June 1974, for traces and additional AESHYLOCK/2 information on
MANESHINA.
D. PID page 4, paragraph 5, Marina and Yevgeniy SHTERN who
enigrated to the United States in te spring of 1973 are the subjects
cf 201-915125. There is little information in the file to add to
PESHYLOCK/2's informatica.
E. PID page 4, paragraph 5, Subject's acquaintance Polina
ZALTSMAN. There are no traces on
10
SECRET
*ZALTSAN, Polina
SEX: F
DOB:
РОВ:
CIT: USSR
OCC: Fairdresser
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Known to 201-0926536. ZALTSAN is employed at the exclusive
Salon Number One on Kuznetskiy Fost which is patronized by high party
wives. ZALTSMAN wants to exigrate.
F. PID page 4, paragraph 6, Subject's acquaintance Klavčiya
OGURTSOVA. There are no traces on
*OGURTSOVA, Kiavdiya
SEX:
DOB:
F
c1929
POB: USSR, Moscow
CIT: USSR
CCC:
Hairdresser
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Known to 201-926536. Master hairdresser at Salon Number One.
on Kuznetskiy Most. Does the hair of high ranking Party wives. Trusted
Party member. Son Andrey COURTSOV is a student at an aviation academy.
Husband is an insignificant factory worker.
G. PKD page 5, paragraph 7, Subject's acquaintance Galina
AYVAYZYAN. SB/310 travel runs confirm that AYVAYZYAN traveled to France
in September 1970. There are no other traces on
*AYVAYZYAN, Galina
SEX:
DOB:
F
c1939
POB: USSR
CIT: USSR
OCC:
Hairdresser
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Known to 201-926536. Works at Intourist Hotel salon. Does
the hair of wives of visiting dignitaries. Husband Anatoliy works
for biseyer Dance troupe.
*ΑΥΓΑΥΞΥΑΝ, Anatoliy
SEX: M
به
DOB:
PCB:
CIT: USSR
CCC:
Costumer
LOC: USSR, MOSCOW
11
SECRET
X 10 201-926535. Moris as wardrobe manager for
biscyer Dance Troupe. Wife Galina is prominent hairdresser at
Intomist Hotel.
H. Pili page 6, paragraph 13, Subject's mother Fayna Yakovlevna
SOKOLOVSKAYA. There are to traces on Subject's mother. There are no
traces coil LEVAT or Mikhail Sciaronovich DLUGIN. Nor are
there azy traces on
*TSAP, Grigoriy Borisovich
SEX: M
DOB: 31 December 1910
PCB:
USSR
CIT: USSR
CCC: Auto Mechanic
LOC: USSR, Moscow
Stepfather of 201-926536. TSAP and wife Fayra Yakovlevra
SOKOLOVSKAYA are pensioners who hope to enigrate to the USA.
I. PKD page 6, paragraph 14, Subject's twin sister Vera
Mikhaylcura DLUGINA. There are no traces on DLUGINA.
J. PAD page 6, paragraph 14B, Subject's half-brother Leonid
Mikhaylovich MOGILEVSKIY. See SX-23635 for traces and additional
AESHYLOCK/2 information on MMGILEVSKIY.
15. TRACES ON INDIVIDUALS MENTIONED IN THE INTERVAL SUPPLEMENT TO
THE PRELIMON