14-00000
104-10234-10270
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
L
ADMINISTRATIVE-
INTERNAL USE ONLY
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
; FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Washington, D.C. 20535
April 9, 1571,
In Eeply, Please liefer to
:
File No.
!
peros
Current
fraced
E즈피.
1717419- 0934
POMEN FOLITICAM TE-TOM ROELIG
Ca March 31, 15711. Zeving Deviceon, self-
sduition Nestores incant
Consultant in
cashed the following information:
Dictates of te inic
Ca Merch 24, 1571, son was contacted by Lais
Jose Doningtee, hecheni ulita rullio da comin ver.
dorghter of the late dictates
2. Amjillo. com his wife and che lacter's cotier
are presrully seeking at 53 "eth rous Island, th
Horca. in the course of tais comoristica, Lorinqres L
..con cast officiis of the United States
in the following Lavermotion concerning Colonel ontos encic
antern wo prezenty semics in caris, Spain, and wis
toen ing in tadrid for more time. (seiner did not formich
Pracie's
dress in brid).
Jinguez told Davidsen thet Colonel rache hai teenica
the payroll of the lase jilla's sen, sarel L. Tafilio, Jr.,
prior to the latter's conta in 19. froche, while resi..jogin
Karis, fodles cation, mothered throuch his sources,
conceselor serienes fren the ominican Republic and other Lin
Meriera countries, mo uouis se pascing carouh Spain en roce
to their native countries, after having co-picted coniic
varfere trataing in Corchoslowite and the Soviet Union.
Jr. would pass this infomation on to overment officials in the
Dominican Republic.
SECURITY
DBD 10635
ADMINISTRATIVE-
INTERNAL USE ONLY
22
9-1
14-00000
SIT
L
ADMISTRATIVE-
INTERAL USE ONLY
F POLITICAL Ems.CLALIC
Poninores told Arvidson that during a recent trip
to Purope, he had not fercie. Gavaison was not certain
ther
the rooting took place in London, Calcad, or in marid). Loainque
found that /recke vas in finencial straits. Patinez gave
reche $1,000.00 to assist the latter in paying off some
Gobta. Dominguez did this as a gesture of Ertenichip.
Besinçuez told Davidson that Aroche poses as a supporter
of the former President of the wominican Republic, Juan Caceh,
but cercally is a supporter of the present President, Jocruin
calmer. usinquez unscribes armchè as being in his errly
fomtos, anu ra a potential londer he has the confidence of
studracs, desinguez sau that irache has contacts with the Tupa-
horos, e errillas do mek to cvestirow the government of
Cruary, ona with other evolutionary groups in Latin America.
Azecin no concrete capoyou by the Theria Air Lines of april,
and through these contacts is aware of noverents of radical;
Hominican Republic and Latin American students entering and
Leaving Spain.
:
Desinevez expressed concern that Arachhe, because of
its por Elnancial committen, ight coratie in the future,
Join forres with Aminican mobile exrevist groms. Josintez
tolu avlicon tint irache sind not be lose to the extremisis.
Dosim ucz believes that officials of the United States Government
hould be made aware of the above, as they wight wish to get in
contact with creche and enlist hisaid in furnishing information
on student,extremists.
---Loainguez told Javidson that Trujillo ed another
source, a Captaba La Chapell (spelled by visses) Lio is presently
essigned to the Cabassy of the worintcen regublic in Mexico.
Cavidson did not recall the first name of this individual).
Dominiquez statea he believes that if representatives of the
Caited strtes were to contest in Chapell, the latter world de
cooperative in furnishing informatica concerning carendst
groups. Coniaquez stated that valike Grache, La Chapell is not
in financial straits.
ADMATIVE-
INTERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
ADMISTRATIVE-
INTERIEUSE ONLY
FOSION FOLITICAL MATEMS-DCTMYCAN FOOTUCLIC
Concerning Domingues, Davidson stated he has been
friendly with him and with his wife and the latter's notes for
coveral years. Davidson stated he sawdered some assistance on
a purely wametarien bruis, and without charge of cay trd to
the wife of bevinter in 1252. At that time, Angelits Loninques
was trying to obtain a visa for her mother, a vas tien in
Spain, to cater the laited States.. Davidson stated seminiquez
made a social call ca sin on arch 26, 1971, and that aention of
Arache and La Chapell came up during the course of converorcion.
Davidson caid he does not represent Scaiaques or his wife and
nother-in-law in businnen matters; however, there is a possibility
that he nay live business dealings with them in the future
conecening the possible sale of a cometo processing plant in
Spain owned by des. Postques and/or her mother.
Davidson stated that he had never leard of Arache er
La Chapell prior to his conversation with Dominguez.
DBD 10635
ADMINISTRATIVE--
INTERNAL USE ONLY
This Accument contains peitter
Beeen.nredetда гор cоnciu-ins et
the Fil. It is the protary ef
the 17 and is hd to your acancy
It and its at Dee at to t
22-9
Cistribal cuisine your

