12.00000
104-10406-10136
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
SECRET
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
3. DEFINITIONS
Within the context of this instruction, the definitions listed below will apply.
Special note must be taken of the fact that the key term "operational use"
employed throughout this instruction has been defined in the most succinct
manner consistent with clarity. It has not been feasible, however, to cover in
a definition the entire scope of possible variations in operational circumstances
which may be encountered in DDO activities. The definition of "operational
use" is intended to provide guidance for the majority of cases, and must be
employed with responsible operational judgment. Issues involving a deter-
mination of "operational use" which cannot be resolved with reasonable as-
surance by the responsible operating components will be referred to the
Deputy Director for Operations for decision.
a. Operational Use
Operational use is interpreted to mean the recruitment, utilization, or train-
ing of any individual or group for DDO purposes on either a witting or
unwitting basis by or on the behalf of an element of the Operations Direc-
torate. Utilization is made of an individual or group whenever that in-
dividual or group, responding to the direction or solicitation of a DDO
element, provides information, performs services, provides cover, or supplies
financial, material, or other support necessary for the accomplishment of
DDO operational objectives either directly or indirectly, to or for an ele-
ment of the Operations Directorate.
b. DDO Element
Any person or group who or which is responsible to, owned or controlled
either directly or indirectly by the Operations Directorate. Included under
this definition are employees or members of Agency proprietary mech-
anisms.
c. Operational Contact
Any association having as its purpose the initiation or furtherance of DDO
operations.
4. RESTRICTIONS ON OPERATIONAL USE
a. Restrictions on the operational use of individuals or groups are of four types
and cover twenty five separate categories as outlined below and as described
in greater detail in paragraphs 5 through 8 of this instruction:
(1) Operational Use is Prohibited (see paragraph 5):
(a) Members and trainees of ACTION;
(b)
D
D
2
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
ΝΟ. 50-10
(c) Officials or employees of the
(d) Officials, employees, or
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
(e) Employees of US private detective investigative agencies.
(2) Operational Use Requires Special Extra-Agency Concurrence (see
paragraph 6): AND APPROVAL OF.SA/ADDO,
(a) Employees of other U.S. Government agencies;
(b) DDO agents or assets
(c), Agents and human sources of foreign intelligence
(d). Citizens (or persons documented as citizens) of
(e)
(f)
(3) Operational Use Requires Special Approval by the DDO (see para-
graph 17
(a)
(b)
(d)
employees;
(c) Individuals engaged in
(e)
(f) Staff members or officials of Red Cross societies; 1
(g) (Officials of the Vatican State;
(h)
(i)
(
(k)
(4) Operational Use Requires Approval by Chief of Area Division (see
paragraph 8):
(a) Citizens or alien residents
(b) Non-U.S. citizen delegates or-emplovees
(c) Members of the
community.
b. Operational use of an individual who comes under more than one type of
restriction will be controlled by the highest type of restriction applicable
in his particular case.
3
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
5. OPERATIONAL USE PROHIBITED
a. Members and Trainees of ACTION
(1) It is Agency policy that members and trainees of ACTION will not be
used in any capacity, with or without remuneration, by the Agency.
or by organizations under its jurisdiction. (The term "members of AC-
TION will be understood to mean anyone employed by or associated
with ACTION except trainees.)
(2) It is Agency policy that former members_of_ACTION may be em-
ployed or used by the Agency or by organizations under its jurisdiction
only in accordance with the following:
(a) Except as stated in (b) below, a former member of ACTION
may be employed or used operationally by any element of the
Agency only if a period of five full years has elapsed since his..
separation from ACTION.)
(b) An Agency-controlled organization may hire a former member of
ACTION, but only for duties related to the overt purposes of such
organization, if a period of at least.twenty-four months has elapsed:
since his separation from ACTION.
(c) The employment or use of a former member of ACTION under
the provisions of subparagraph (a) or (b) above must have the
specific prior approval of the Deputy Director for Operations.
(3) Former trainees whose ACTION service included duty or training over-
seas are subject to the rules governing employment or use of former
members of ACTION (subparagraph (2) above). Former trainees who
did not serve at any time as members of ACTION and whose (ACTION)
service did not include duty or training overseas may be employed or
used operationally by DDO elements provided the specific prior ap-
proval of the Deputy Director for Operations is obtained.
(4) A former member or trainee of ACTION whose employment or use
is permitted by subparagraph (2) or (3) above may not be assigned
to or used in a country for which he had been trained or to which
he had been assigned while with ACTION
(5) Information may be received by the Domestic Collection Division
from private corporations and other organizations employing former
ACTION personnel, notwithstanding the fact that the information may
originate with former ACTION personnel. However, any direct brief-
ing or debriefing of or contact with former members or trainees of
ACTION is subject to the following:
(a) The specific prior approval of the Deputy Director for Operations
must be obtained.
)
4
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
b.
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
(b) If the individual is a former member of ACTION, or a former
trainee whose ACTION service included duty or training over-
seas, five years must have elapsed since his separation from
ACTION.
If contact with a former ACTION member or a former trainee whose
ACTION service included duty or training overseas should be un-
avoidable during the required five year, waiting period, the Deputy
Director for Operations may request an exception from the Director
of Central Intelligence. Among the possible reasons for such unavoid-
able contact would be the designation of a former member_or_trainee
as the liaison officer to the Domestic Collection Division.
DDO policy prohibits the operational use of individuals who are receiving
under certain provisions (see below) of the
as amended,
commonly known as the
Falling under this prohibi-
tion are teachers, research scholars, lecturers and students) (including
who have been selected to receive
Dappointed
by the President of the United States. Operational use of such individuals
is prohibited only during the period when they are participating in the
This prohibition specifically
does not apply to the several other categories of grantees supported by
other provisions of the
such as
do not come under the aegis of the
(see 7.j., below).
c. Officials or Employees of the
who
DDO policy prohibits the operational use of the officials or employees
of the
Contacts with such
individuals which DDO officers are obliged to make in their cover ca-
pacities must be limited to their cover assignments.
d. Officials, Employees, or Grantees of the
DDO policy prohibits the operational use of grantees of the
or of other
persons actively participating in programs which are wholly sponsored.
and controlled by any of these
Additionally, there will be
no operational use made of the officials or employees of these organiza-
tions. In general, however, there is no restriction on nonoperational con-
tacts or consultations with such individuals.
5
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DOI 50-10
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
e. Employees of U.S. Private Detective Investigative Agencies)
DDO policy prohibits the operational use either in the United States
or overseas of the employees of any U.S.-owned or -controlled private)
detective investigative agency. This policy does not apply to operational
use of employees of organizations which are engaged strictly in commercial
6. EXTRA-AGENCY CONCURRENCE REQUIRED
a. Employees of Other U.S. Government Agencies)
Approval for the operational use of staff or contract (including foreign)
employees of other U.S. Government agencies will be granted only in
cases where the employee's parent agency in Washington has been notified
of and has approved of the intended operational use in accordance with
the provisions of DOI 10-5.
b. DDO Agents or Assets in
In accordance with the agreement existing between the
and, this Agency, the restrictions listed below apply to
the operational activity of the Operations Directorate conducted in the
of appropriate information on
is the responsibility of
Coordination with
DDO operational activities in
the Chief, Liaison Group, Operations. Staff.
(1) All investigations by this Agency of
require the prior concurrence of the In this context, the
term "investigation" means systematic and direct inquiries or pro-
cedures (such as physical or technical surveillances or neighborhood
inquiries) aimed at developing information concerning an individual's
activities or background; "investigation" does not include the ac-
ceptance or the development of information through social contacts
or contacts normally made by Agency officials in discharging their
cover functions.
(2) Any approach in the United States by a DDO element for recruit-)
ment
requires the prior concurrence of
(3) Any planned meeting in the United States for assessment and social
development between a DDO element and a foreign official of known
or presumed interest to
or between a DDO element and an
requires that prior noti-/
fication be provided to
(4) Whenever domestic DDO operations involve matters pertaining to
the national security of the United States, appropriate identification
of persons engaged in the operations in the United States will be
6
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
ΝΟ. 50-10
provided to
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
In accordance with this policy, the following
categories of DDO assets will be identified to
purposes.
who come to the United States for operational
c. Agents and Human Sources of Foreign Intelligence
The
has been established at head-
quarters to provide for United States Intelligence Board (USIB) agencies
a centralized record of
A principal purpose of the
prevent multiple
is to register primacy of interest and)
it is USIB policy that no individual
(registered in the
by one USIB agency will be used for operational pur-
poses by any other USIB agency without the specific prior approval of the
If a DDO element desires to arrange the
will con-
to determine whether there is a
tact the agency having
willingness to discuss this matter.
d. Citizensor Rersons Documented as Citizens) of
(1) The operational use of citizens of the above-named
is restricted
by agreements with the intelligence or security authorities of such
which require the prior approval of the appropriate
authority. Such approval will be obtained at the earliest feasible stage
of development through the
(2) The above restriction also governs the use of
representing DDO staff or agent personnel as
documentation
Approval for the use of such documentation/ will
be sought through the same channels as stated in subparagraph (1)
above.
(3) Authority to make operational use of the persons or documentation
described in the above subparagraphs without obtaining the prior
approval of the
authority) concerned may be granted only
by the Deputy Director for Operations or by the Director.
7
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DOI 50-10
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
e.
The operational use of any citizen of Norway, West Germany or The
is, under certain conditions, contingent on prior approval
of the national intelligence service concerned. These
Tare par-
ticularly sensitive in cases involving the operational use of their
who are
☐ and who are (serving
only flags. Each case involving the proposed operational use of a
f.
one of these
will be reviewed by the Chief of the
of
Division in the light of the agreements existing between this Agency and
the national intelligence service concerned. After weighing all of the
equities, the Chief of the
Division will decide whether approval
is required from the national intelligence service concerned. When re-
quired, approvals for the operational use of such individuals will be
obtained from the appropriate national intelligence services by the
Division.
The operational use of
who_are serving
regardless of their
carrying the
is, under certain conditions, subject
to provisions of the agreements existing between this Agency and the
national intelligence service concerned. Each case involving the proposed
operational use of such
will be reviewed by the Chief
of the
Division or the Chief of the
Division, as ap-
propriate, in the light of the pertinent interservice agreements. After
weighing all of the equities, the Chief of the
Division or the
Chief of the
Division will determine the course of action to
be taken with regard to the national intelligence service concerned.
7. APPROVAL BY THE DDO REQUIRED
Approval by the Deputy Director for Operations for the operational use
of any individual who falls into one of the categories described in this para-
graph will be requested by memorandum. The individual's covert approval
status will be described in the memorandum to the Deputy Director for
Operations, together with a concise explanation of the intended operational
use. (In connection with this paragraph, contacts by the Domestic Collection
Division with individuals or firms do not require approval by the Deputy
Director for Operations provided they constitute merely briefing or de-
briefing for the purpose of obtaining information acquired by an individual
or representative of a firm in the course of his normal activities. If, however,
in any case the contact is on behalf of another element of the Operation
8
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
Directorate or another agency; or if an individual or firm will be requested
to perform an operational task or to deviate from his or its normal pattern
of activity; or if the activity, even though consistent with the individual's
or firm's normal pattern of activity, will take place because requested or
funded by the Domestic Collection Division; that case will be subject to
the requirement for approval by the Deputy Director for Operations.)
a
(see DOI 240-6)
(1) Operational use of
requires prior approval by the Deputy Director for Operations whenever
there is danger that such activity might serve in any way (to
Such activities include but are not limited to the
erational use abread of
The op-
media for non-U.S. audiences does not require approval by the Deputy
Director for Operations even though such activities may have some
unintended and unsolicited fallout
(2) Approval by the Deputy Director for Operations is also required prior
to the operational use of
citizen or when the
or control.
b.
Employees
whenever the individual is a U.S.
involved is under U.S. ownership
It is DDO policy to avoid operational use of employees of the
organization including indigenous employees. Exceptional individual cases
involving priority operational objectives will be considered on their merits.
Prior approval by the Deputy Director for Operations will be required
in all cases.
c. Individuals Engaged in
(see DOI 50-18)
Individuals (engaged in
or seek to have an
aspects of
the
which in any way have
are
considered to be in a separate sensitive category. In view of the peculiar
activity, including the special requirements of
Act; approval by the Deputy Director
for Operations is required prior to the operational use in a
capacity of any individual who is engaged in
activities/
and who is located in or operating into the United States.
9
SECRET
13-00000
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
d.
SECRET
(see DOI 60-11)
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
e.
Prior approval of the Director or the Deputy Director for Operations is
required for operational contact in the United States with or operational
use of
contro If, while in the United States, such individual is to be investigated,
approached for recruitment, or contacted for operational purposes, the prior
concurrence of
will also be required in accordance with para-
graph ĉ.b., above.
It is DDO policy that the operational use of
including those of its various main organs and of
is of such sensitivity as to require
special consideration by the Deputy Director for Operations. In especially
worthwhile cases wherein operational use of a particular individual
is deemed essential for the accomplishment of the DDO mission, approval
may be obtained. In each case involving a non-U.S. citizen assigned in
the U.S. or a U.S. citizen wherever assigned, the prior approval of the
Deputy Director for Operations will be required. (See paragraph 8.b.
regarding use of non-U.S. citizen
not assigned
individual is to be
in the U.S.) If, while in the United States, the
investigated, approached for recruitment, or contacted for operational pur-
poses, the prior concurrence of
in paragraph 6.b., above.
may also be required as outlined
f. Staff Members or Officials of Red Cross Societies
The operational use of staff members or officials of the International Red
Cross or its affiliated national Red Cross, Red Crescent, or other equivalent
societies requires special consideration and prior approval by the Deputy
Director for Operations. DDO elements should make every effort to avoid
the operational use of staff members or officials of Red Cross societies. How-
ever, when especially high priority objectives are at stake and alternative
agent assets are not available, approval for the use of such individuals may..
be granted by the Deputy Director for Operations.
g. Officials of the Vatican State
h
Operational contact with officials of the Vatican State will be made only
with the prior approval of the Deputy Director for Operations. Operational
use of Vatican officials will be contingent on prior approval by the Deputy
Director for Operations.
U.S. or foreign
pating in
partici-
or other
10
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DOI 50-10
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
(except certain
see paragraph 5.b.,
above) are considered to be in a separate sensitive category. Operational
use of such individuals while they are actively participating in an
requires special consideration
and approval by the Deputy Director for Operations prior to such use. In
certain especially worthwhile cases wherein the operational use of a par-
ticular
is considered essential to
the accomplishment of the DDO mission, the Deputy Director for Opera-
tions may grant approval. Memoranda requesting such approval will be
forwarded through the Chief, Foreign Resources Division. In such cases the
Deputy Director for Operations will determine whether or not to seek the
concurrence of the
i. Members of
(1) It is U.S. Government policy that no federal agency shall provide any
This policy.
applies to all foreign as well as domestic activities of such organiza
tions. In compliance with the above proscription, DDO policy requires
the most careful scrutiny of all cases involving operational contact with
The operational use of any employee, staff
member or official of such an organization requires prior approval by
the Deputy Director for Operations. The Deputy Director for Opera-
tions will determine whether or not to seek extra-Agency approval for
the conduct of such operations.
(2) Operational use including covert funding abroad of
and the personnel thereof is per-
mitted even if the organization is also funded by
j. Officials or Employees of
k.
Operational use of the officials or employees of the
requires prior approval of the Deputy Director for Operations.
Contacts with such individuals which DDO officers are obliged to make in
their cover capacities will not involve operational matters until the approval
of the Deputy Director for Operations has been secured.
Operational use of or operational contact with members of
while they are on assignment in the United States will not be
made without the prior approval of the Deputy Director for Operations.
are participants in programs established by various
foreign countries in collaboration with the Department of State as a
11
SECRET
13-00000
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
for a period of
SECRET
(
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
Such volunteers are sent to the U.S.
The name of the organization may vary by country.
8. OPERATIONAL USE REQUIRES APPROVAL BY CHIEF OF AREA
DIVISION
Operational use of any individual in the categories listed in this paragraph
is considered of such sensitivity as to require special consideration and ap-
proval by the appropriate Area Division Chief. This authority may not be
delegated. The request for approval will be by memorandum in which the
individual's covert approval status will be described, together with a concise
explanation of the intended operational use.
a. Citizens or Alien Residents
DOI 50-19)
(see
The operational use in
who have
been admitted for permanent residence or have resided for a prolonged
period in the U.S., requires the prior approval of the Chief of the Area
Division under whose jurisdiction the intended use is to take place.
b. Non-U.S. Citizen Delegates or Employees
The operational use of
who are not assigned in the U.S. requires the prior ap-
proval of the Chief of the Area Division under whose jurisdiction the in-
tended use is to take place.
c. Members of the
Community
(1) Within the context of this instruction a member of the academic com-
munity is defined as:
associated with
Persons
are not considered to be members of the
community.
community, especially
(2) Operational use of members of the
those cases wherein an individual is to be made witting of Agency
interest, will be on a highly selective basis. Each case will be examined
to ascertain its essentiality to the DDO mission in terms of the price
of possible disclosure, and to ensure that proper security procedures
can be observed. When it has been determined that the operational
use of a member of the
community as defined above is
12
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
operationally feasible and without suitable alternative, prior approval
in the following cases will be obtained as indicated below:
(a) Any U.S. citizen who is a member of the
and who is associated in any way with any
(b) Any non-U.S. citizen who is a member of the
and who is associated in any way with any
community)
community
DDO
re-Offal
which is located either in the United States or abroad.
If the individual is located in the United States, approval will be re-C
quested by memorandum to the Chief, Foreign Resources Division.
The memorandum will include a statement that the individual is, or
is not, a DCD asset or contact, and in the event he is will include
the concurrence of the Chief, Domestic Collection Division. If the in-
dividual is located outside the United States, approval will be requested
by memorandum to the Chief of the Area Division who has jurisdiction
over the area concerned. Operational use of members of the
community who are not associated in any way with
is also con-
sidered sensitive. The operational use of such individuals also requires
the approval of the Chief of the Area Division In any case involving
a well known person or having special security implications, the
Division Chief to whom the request is referred under the above pro-
visions will consult with the DDO and obtain the latter's approval.
(3) The provisions of paragraph (2) do not apply to Domestic Collection
Division contacts with members of the
community, but such
contacts are subject to the following requirements:
(a) If a member of the
community would be asked to per-
form an operational task or to alter his normal pattern of activity
in order to serve Agency purposes, prior approval of the Chief,
Domestic Collection Division is required. Additionally, if such an
individual will be in a foreign area, the concurrence of the Chief
of the Area Division concerned will be obtained.
(b) Prior concurrence will be obtained from the appropriate Area
Division Chief if an individual is to be utilized in a politically
sensitive area where his presence or activities could potentially
embarrass the interests of the U.S. Government.
(c) The requirements of paragraph S.a. apply if a citizen or alien
resident of the United States would be used in a denied area.
(4) At the end of each calendar year, Chiefs of Divisions will submit a
report to the Deputy Director for Operations (via Chief, Foreign
Resources Division) on the number of individuals recruited from the
13
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
DDO INSTRUCTION
NO. 50-10
DOI 50-10
OPERATIONS-GENERAL
4 September 1973
community during that year. This audit will permit the DDO
to keep abreast of major quantitative changes in the number of po-
tentially sensitive operational cases in each Division.
(5) It should be noted that the provisions of this paragraph do not apply
to DDO employees who wish to
D
Approval for
D
such activity will be obtained in accordance with the provisions of
HR 10-7.
9. INDIVIDUAL CHANGES OF STATUS OR CATEGORY
When an individual undergoes a change of status which places him in one of
the restricted categories described above, or transfers him from one category
to another, his operational use or continued operational use is contingent upon
approval or reapproval as prescribed for his new status.
10. INTERPRETATION OR MODIFICATION OF RESTRICTIONS
Certain of the policy restrictions described in this instruction are subject to
interpretation, extension or modification by the Deputy Director for Opera-
tions depending on the conditions and the atmosphere for DDO operations
at any particular time. Especially when dealing on the edges of policy rulings
and within the guidelines set forth herein, particular heed should be paid to
the price of disclosure, including careful consideration of the sensitivities of
the individuals involved. When there is any doubt concerning the application
of these restrictions, guidance should be obtained from the Deputy Director
for Operations.
1
William E. Nelson
Deputy Director for Operations
14
SECRET