14-00000
104-10181-10114
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
J
SECACT
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
24 March 1967
など3477
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, CI/R&A
SUBJECT:
Trace Results on Persons Connected with
Centro Mondiale Commerciale (World Trade
Center)
REFERENCE:
Our memorandum of 8 March 1967 on Italian
aspects of the Clay Shaw affair
1. The 5 March 1967 edition of Il Messaggero contains
a story linking Clay Shaw, currently under investigation in
New Orleans for his alleged part in a Kennedy assassination
conspiracy, with Centro Mondiale Commerciale (CMC) in Rome.
The story mentions four other persons as having been in-
volved with CMC: Carlo D'AMELIO, a lawyer and former
president of CMC; Ferenc NAGY, former Prime Minister of
Hungary; Henrich MANDEL-MANTELLO, president of the Italo-
American Hotel Corporation, who was managing director of
CMC; and George MANDEL, father of Henrich MANDEL-MANTELLO
and founder of CMC. A copy of the Il Messaggero story was
forwarded with the reference memorandum.
2. D'AMELIO, Carlo appears to be identical with the
Rome lawyer Carlo D'AMELIO listed on page 464 of the 1956
edition of Panorama Bibliografico degli Italiani D'Oggi.
According to Panorama, D'AMELIO was born in May of 1902 in
Naples, is a lawyer and publicist, represented the Savoy
(Italian royal family) heirs' claims, and was King Farouk's
lawyer. The Il Messaggero story noted above states that
D'AMELIO was the lawyer and administrator of the estates of
Italy's ex-royalty. OIR-605, 15 January 1953, mentions a
fnu D'AMELIO, a lawyer for ex-King Farouk of Egypt.
5013, 28 April 1955, mentions a lawyer, Carlo AMELIO.
document cannot be located and no further information is
available. It seems likely that all the above are identical
with the Carlo D'AMELIO of CMC.
NECA-
This
3. NAGY, Ferenc, the subject of 201-11893, was a cleared
contact of the International Organizations Division. His 201
file contains a number of references to his association with
the World Trade Center. (See attachments.)
4. MANDEL-MANTELLO, Henrich. As reported in OIRA-
32933, 28 January 1963, an official Italian service stated
08
SECRET
:::
180
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
that a Heinrich MANDEL-MANTELLO, an Austrian citizen, formerly
an Hungarian citizen, is the administrator of the World Trade
Center, PERMINDEX, Piazza degli Uffici, Viale del Lavoro,
EUR, Rome. He reportedly had contact with Hungarian Minister
Gyula SIMO (201-257724). According to the 5 March 1967 story
in Il Messaggero, Henrich MANDEL-MANTELLO's father is George
MANDEL. ESBW-1819, 17 June 1954, states that George MONTELLO
(an alias of George MANDEL) had a son between the ages of
22 and 26 years old in 1954. It is possible that this is
Henrich MANDEL-MANTELLO of CMC.
5. MANDEL, George (aka MANTELLO, George and other
aliases) is the subject of 201-11728. He is described as
an unsavory person who has been involved in shady deals
since World War II. (See attachments.)
6. No pertinent identifiable information was found on
Nikolaus FISCHER in addition to his being listed in the 1963-
64 Annuario Parlamentare as managing director of CMC.
7. The attached documents are related to an investigation
of PERMINDEX initiated by CIA in 1959. This was the result
of a query from NAGY asking if CIA would be interested in
using PERMINDEX in some capacity. The documents did not
indicate whether or not CIA decided to use PERMINDEX.
ATTACHMENTS:
A
She 03
John
John John J. Shea
C/E/I
{
A copy of a 10 November 1959 memorandum from Chief,
IOD to Chief, Commercial Staff requesting information
on NAGY and PERMINDEX of Basel, Switzerland.
received from Non-official Cover section of Central
(Copy
Cover Staff.)
BA 23 November 1959 memorandum from Commercial Staff
to Chief, RID/Index section requesting information on
a number of individuals including NAGY, MANDEL, and
D'AMELIO.
(Copy extracted from 201-11728 on George
MANTELLO.)
C- A group of documents concerning PERMINDEX and CMC,
apparently in answer to Attachments A and B above.
(Copies extracted from 201-11893 on Ferenc NAGY.)
:
SECRET
о
180
14-00000
رية
EORANDUM FOR: Chief, Comercial Staff
SUBJECT:
*
Perzindex - World Trade Coater
(2)
40
2619
:
エ
1009
:
1. For former prima sinister of y, presently
resident in the United States, and a covert ascociate of 100 is Presi-
dent of Permindex, a Evics corporatica with principal cificca in Roma
and representatives in various parts of the world. The larld Treds
Center, in which is also interested is escociated with leruindex.
Brochures describing these organizations are attached.
2. Nagy has asked a represcatative of IOD if CIA would be inter-
ested in:
a) Placing an American businesmen en the board of Ferzindex.
b) Placing a CIA egent ca the staff of Fermindez.
c) Purcicaing como chares in Perminder through the clove repro-
sentative on the Board in order to have a voice in the ranagement
of it. (Nagy emhanizes that the firu io well finenced and that
this is not a pitch for funis).
3. The advantages which in lieky's judecat Permindex offers to
CIA includa opportunity to develop information on and coatccts in cany
developing countries of Asia and Africe; cover; and the possibility of
influencing the economies of these countries to some extent. (Permincox
is reported to have representatives reaching 52 comtries, including the
Bloo and several countries of Africa and Asia.
14. Pernindex has just opened its offices and exhibit halls in Roma
and expects to be in full operation in the spring 1960.
5. Before pursuing this further, IOD would appreciato Cl Staff'ס
Judgment on the following:
a) Financial condition of Perzindex and the World Trade Center.
Dr. Nagy says that Banca Del Laboro, Rome, Italy can suply full
details on cuch matters.
b) Pusinesa potential of Permindex in the exhibit and inter-
national trade field; its competition; etc.
/w
itt 1-3479
1
105
-301-813193
:
14-00000
-2-
c) Any cents Ci night palo on the buccond bustseco
careers and potential of. D. V. field Hanging Director of
Perniudens Comit C. Do, President of the World Trade Center;
)..وسامح علاما Director of the World Trade Center.
6. Anything Ci Staff richt furnich on the above would to very much
cepreciated. We understand that wasoy Rome, the U.S. Departcont of
Commerce, and ICA have favorably reported on the possibilities of this
organization.
Attachment:
Brochure describing Permindex
10/1/FBB:ek (6 November 1959)
Distribution:
2 Addressee
1-C/Cover Div. ✓
1
C/CD/00
1 C/10
3- 10/1
CORD MEYER, JR.
Chicf
International Organisations Divisica
14-00000
ל
:
SEOSET
MEMORANDUN FOR: Chief, RI Index Section
ATTENTION:
Mr. A. J. Zarichak
1001 & Building
23 November 1959
1.
This Staff has recently been deputed to render a report on
a certain organization and an affiliate and we need histerical data
concerning enveral individuals, which appear on the attached list.
2. The fullest information available, including financial
standing and integrity, as well as political affiliations, etc., to
required.
CHARLES P. WHITS
Commercial Staff
:
15 DEC
3
ser
Pir
mil
am
SERPET
Flu att st. Ex 3479
3493
14-00000
SECE
1.
Dr. Fereno ag
2.
Dr. Ernst W. Infeld
3.
Dr. Ernst 7elest
4. Count Carlo D'Amelio
5. Georges Mantellos
Dr-Prime Minister Hargary, pra 1945. Hea
resided in United States, latterly fro
1955 has been in Ewitzerland Pasal.
Reputedly involved in PIERMINDSX Ltd.
Langer, 3 Lovenstrasse, Zurich,
Switzerland.
Bern, Switzerland
Rons. Reportedly President world Trade
Center" (Centro Mundial: Commerciale di Roma)
Naturalised Swiss of Hungarian-Rumanian
origin.
Georges Mandel-Montello.
Hay have resided atı
10 Averne Pechter and
Also known ası Georges Mandel, or
Flace Deroulede, 3. Jeneva
Is said to have a police dossier of
extensive proportions.
6.
B. A. Kantello
? Rome, Italy. Is there any connection
with 5 apove?
7.
Fritz Schurch
Fasel, naybe Poze at present.
8.
Hana Seligman-Schurch
Carel. Panker
9.
Dr. Edgar Salin
Casel
:1"
:
14-00000
SECRET
25 February 1960
MEMORANDUM FOR: 10 Division, Chief, Branch-1
SUBJECT:
PERMINELX and World Trade Center
Memorandum of 10 November 1959
1. We regret to say that up to date the information obtained via
Agency channels does not provide us with sufficient data to form any
opinion with respect to the items contained in paragraph 5 of the sub-
ject memorandum. Consequently, as we have discussed with you, the only
logical source of the essential facts is Dr. Nagy himself. We attach
a list of the requirements as we see them.
2.
We have one more line of inquiry out via reliable friends in
the hope of obtaining some up to date information on certain aspects,
although we are not too sanguins. Cards are being held very close to
the chest. We should have the answer shortly.
3. We shall then try and assemble the ragged and somewhat con-
flicting information that we have been able to collect and furnish
same although it will be of little real value to the main subject
matter.
4.
Dr. Nagy is, we are convinced, the only one who can give
the necessary information by furnishing the answers and data requested
in the attachment.
Polieti
CHARLES P. WHITE
Commercial Staff
41
With 3 3479
SECRET
251-8139493
14-00000
1.
2.
SECRET
INFORMATION TO BE FURNISHED BY DR. NAJY
WITH RESPECT TO PERAINDEX LTD. AND 113
SUBSIDIARY
It has been learned that the original authorized and paid up
capitals of the two companies involved in the World Exhibit
Enterprise, initiated by Dr. Nary, are as follows:
Roreign
Currency
Bquiv U. 8.
Currency
Sv Fres 1,000,000 $230,000
PERMINDEX LTD. Registered Jan. 30, 1956
Swiss Corporation
CENTRO MONDIALE COMMERCIALE S.P.A.
Registered April 22, 1958
Italian Corporation (Affiliate) Lira 1,000,000 $150,000
It is assumed that the capital of the Rome affiliate is wholly
subscribed and paid up by the parent company, PERMINDEX. Is this
a correct assumption?.
3.
Has there been any increase in the authorized capital of the
Italian company since the inception? If so, to what extent?
Names of subscribers and amount subscribed? Amount paid up.
4.
What was cost of completion of EUR buildings and preparation of
same for oponing date of Permanent exhibit? Was this cost borne
by owner or lessee?
5.
Financial statement as at December 31, 1959 or more recent date
of both companies consisting of certified Balance Sheet and Profit
and Loss Statement prepared on the accrual basis.
6.
Contracted space by Exhibitors by countries for first year
commencing May 1, 1960 opening date and subsequent years if any.
7.
Amount of first year's expected gross income segregated as to
type.
8.
Amount of first year's expenditures segregated
(a) Annual rent of EUR buildings
(b) Other departmentalized.
February 25, 1960
SECRET
:
14-00000
SECRET
KENTRANTEN FOR: Chief, 10 Division
SUBJECT:
REDBRANCE
24 March 1960
PERMINDEX and World Trade Center
Your Memorandum Request, 10 November 1959
1. We wrote to Chief, 10/1 on 25 February last that we had to
date recalved some information via Agency channels but it was not
sufficient to come to any intelligent conclusion with respect to the
itana contained in paragraph 5 of the memorandum in reference.
2. We, however, were hopeful that more valuable information
could be obtained through another source. This has now been received
and while it is not complete it does furnish considerably more infor
mation than heretofore obtained. The information has been obtained
fron a recently formed New York Company as U. S. representative of
the World Trade Center and, more particularly, the firm engaged to
promote interest amongst U. S. industries and obtain contracts for
space for the opening on 21 May 1960.
3.
Attached Exhibit "AR summarizes the information received
and the following comments are offered thoroon:
a.
Capital
It is conceivable that the capital of the Italian
company is not in addition to that of Permindex as previously
it has been stated that Permindex was the investing entity in
the World Trade Center.
b.
Loans
This information was sought at the inception of our
inquiry for it was inconceivable that the company could have
prepared the buildings for an international exhibit over a
period of 18 months with only the subscribed capital as the
source of funds. The funds raised from the two syndicates mist
have provided the cost of management and all the multifarious
clans in preparation for the establishment of the Permanant
International Exhibition, the main purpose of the organisation,
including the proparation of the various "Palaces" with all the
utilities required which in various press releases and the like
bad reached one million dollars. There would also be the down
payment on the 18 year lease referred to later.
!
!
SECRET
14-00000
い
c.
Operations
SECRET
i
1
On the basis of hopes expressed in item 2 of Exhibit "A"
there would appear to be a possibility of gross income from rental
space of $1,625,000 for the initial year, which is approximately
50% of the potential. Plus admissions of, say, 1,500,000, against
the hope of 2,500,000, which would return $750,000. This would
give a total ross income from those two sources of $2,375,000 for
the first year. There are no figures available of offsetting costs
of the venture, including the annual cost of the leased premises.
With respect to the cost of finishing the buildings leased and the
installation of electrical, telephonic and other facilities, it is
not known why the lessees should be called upon to meet the cost;
normally the same would be borne by the owners, in this case the
Italian Coverment.
d. It is believed that a considerable mumber of the
estizated attendance is based on U. S. tourists but we question
the validity of this theory unless the exhibitors who can take
orders are dealing in over-the-counter type of merchandise, which
would not seem practical. There are other points of interest for
the short term tourist to Rome.
With regard to the failure to obtain U. S. exhibitors
and the restrictions imposed upon them and other non-members of
the European industry organizations, as mentioned in Exhibit "A",
it would seem that there has been a lack of research on the part
of management since one of the features stressed was the selling
that could be done at the site. This is contrary to the rules
at the Milan Trade Fair which takes place between 12-27 April
1960.
4.
At this stage, the venture seems highly speculative from an
investort s point of view. For, if the present exhibitors failed to
renew their contracts for space at the end of the first year, the
possibility of obtaining replacements and extending the space sold
would appear to be rather remote. If the Agreement of Lease signed
by the Corporation, said to be for a period of 18 years, should be
breached the penaltios involved would no doubt be high. Failure to
achieve success by rental of all space to International Exhibitors on
a broad base would be a serious handicap of such proportions that it
would be calamitous.
5. The preliminary reports from various consulates and
embassies vere virtually useless as they consisted principally of
propaganda claims to bolster interest in the grandiose plans of the
principal or ostensible entrepreneur.
-2-
SEGNET
:
14-00000
6.
The biographical information referred to in your memorandum
in reference, paragraph 5(c), was pursued at the outset..
8.
Attached are Exhibits "9" and "B-1" furnished by Chief,
RI Index Section and would seem to contain no derogatory informa-
tion except in the cases of HANS SELIGMAN SCHURCH and GEORGES
MANTELLO ("B-1").
b.
On 19 March 1960 an unexpected report was received,
CD/00, covering FRRENCE NAGY and E. A. MANTELIO, see Exhibit
#3-2". The information contained therein was, as regards FERENCE
NAGY, diametrically opposite to that heretofore on record, and
that on his associate and Managing Director of the Italian
Corporation, B. A. MANTELLO, is particularly damning if true.
The contents of this report were that same day conveyed to you
personally and a copy left with you.
c. We were advised that a copy had been furnished another
element of the Agency. We were successful in finally obtaining
the information that it would ultimately reach the Hungarian
Desk. Personal interview was arranged, but the copy had not yet
reached hia. He, however, read the report and stated that the
credibility of the report should be tested by a thorough cross-
examination of the source to eliminate the possibility of it
being the offspring of an amigre squabble.
d. It would seem eminently desirable that an ovaluation
of the report should be undertaken prior to any involvement with
the subject corporation either as an investor or in any other
capacity.
7.
With respect to your request in item 5(a) and (b) for an
expression of our opinión on the following points:
a.
Financial condition of the subject companies;
Business potential of the companies in the exhibit
and international trade fields,
b.
we have not been able to obtain the essential information to determine
the financial condition. As we suggested in our memorandum of 25
February last, Dr. Nagy is the only person available to supply the
financial condition. From what we have so far gleaned, the prospects
of success are precarious and unless exhibitors are found to occupy
the whole available space in the exhibition buildings, and soon, the
first year's exhibit will de unsuccessful with the consequent result
that continuation will not be possible on a profitable basis (see
item & above).
-3-
14-00000
SECRET
8.
It has been stated by the United States Representative that
many firms throughout the world have applied for participation, and
many have, meanwhile, signed contracts. Contracts have been signed in
England
Franco
Oreeco
India
Israel
Italy
Japan
Norsay
Rhodesia
Switzerland
Turkey
It will be noted that no contracts are claimed with any of the Soviet
Bloc countries, which may be a consideration in your decision whether
to inject anyone into the organisation's staff as suggested by the
ex-Prime Minister.
SECRET
CHARLES P. WHITE
Commercial Staff
14-00000
SECRET
Data On PERAI NDEX
WORLD TRADE CENTER
EXHIBIT "A
1. Financial
Capitals
Permindex Ltd.
World Trade Center Inc.
$230,000
160,000
$ 390,000
Equivalent of one million Swiss Francs and ten million Italian
Lira respectively.
Loans:
Foreign Syndicate
!
American Syndicate
$832,500
500,000 2 1,332,500
$1,722,500
1/ Supposedly against issue of preferred stock.
2/ To be repaid from income.
The venture is still seeking $250,000 to $500,000 either in the form of
loans or as an investment.
2.
Operations
The organization has reportedly leaced 80% of the space available
in the four buildings in the EUR group. One of the four buildings is
being used in commection with the Olympic Games and part of another as
a museum.
There are reportedly 25,000 square meters of space available to
exhibitors and the target of rental income is $150 per square meter per
annum. Admission income has been sat at $0.50 and it is hoped that
24 million poreons can be induced to visit the exhibition annually.
Additional income is expected from sale of catalogs, wall space (for
advertising) and services.
3.
Exhibitors
The exhibition will open on 21 May 1960. However only 50% of the
available space has thus fer been contracted for 12 months with an
option to renew on an annual basis. Thus there still remains the
problem of obtaining contracts for the other 50% of the space and to
obtain renewals of contracts when the present commitments expire. The
principal selling feature to the exhibitor has been the fact that
SECRET
A
14-00000
orders could be taken on the spot. However it has transpired that
there are restrictions which preclude American firas, or others, who
are not members of European industry organizations from taking orders.
As of now only four or five U. S. firms have shown intarest in
participating, because they feel that they cannot afford hot to be
represented owing to the broad line of products they mamfacture.
ン
-2-
SECRET
14-00000
MEORARDUN
SECRET
SUBJECT: HACT, Dr. Ferenc; DEILD, Dr. Kroet W.; FELAGT, Dr. Ernst;
D'ASKLIO, Count Carlo; KARTELLO, Georges; HANTELLO, Σ.Α.;
SCHURCH, Prite; SZLIGMAF-Schurch, Bana; and SALIN, Dr. Edgar
1. On 8 February 1957, a usually reliable source indicated, that, in
early November 1956, Dr. Ferenc HAGY, Osorges HARTKILO and one SKLIGMAN,
probably identical with Hans SKLIOMAN-Schurch who vas described as a
Basel barker", vere in contact with each other concerning the Hungarian
Devolution.. It should be noted that information in our files indicated
that, as early as February 1948, MARTELLO and Maceratar, Marik
LIVE, kod taben an active interest in the activities of Hungarian refugees.
Source further reported that BOY and MARTELLO vore both actively interested
in the establishment of permanent exhibition grounds in Basel, Britserland.
The enterprise ves called Permindex and the grounds and buildings were to
cost fifty willion Sviss francs. According to Source, the Basel banker
BELIOMAN probably again refers to Hans SKLIGMAN-Schurch was also involved.
On 29 December 1956, NAGY held a press conference at Basel, in which he
stressed the importance of permanent exhibition grounds for Basol. MAGY
also stated, according to Source, that Perainder hed the backing of "several
big financiers".
2. Source stated that, tecavas of MACY's political notoriety and
MAYIBLIO'a long history of Involvement in shady Gals, the Swiss police
vore watching developments closely, and were of the opinion that Perindex
was the cover for some other, se yet unknom, sotivities on the part of
HAGY and NARZYLO.
3. The files contain the following akiitional information concerning
Bubjouta:
Dr. Ferenc: A fully cleared contact of this offios,
Ma political reliability is unquestionable. Several excellent
biographies of MAGY exist in the files of the Biographies
Register, Office of Central Enference, and of the Biographie
Intelligence Division of the Department of State. We are unable
to give detailed informatics concerning KAGY's financial standing
and integrity. Should you wish to contact MAGY and question him
as to his financial status, this office is in a position to
arrange a meeting between KAJY and a member of your office.
If you desire further information concerning such a sweting,
contact Mr. Peronda Brom, Ertension 3241.
SECRET
CALL USE GLY
B
B
14-00000
1
SECRET
b. Dr. Brast V. DEILD: Information concerning DOKLD can
be found in Department of State Foreign Service Despatch #243,
dated 16 March 1955, from Zurich, Switzerland, DOELD'
is also included on the repertment of Cosmerce, Bureau of
Foreign Commerce Checklist, edition $20 dated 1 April 1955,
and edition #24 dated 1 May 1956.
c.
:
Dr. Krast FEISST: A man of the same name, who is probably
identical with your subject, vas formerly Sviss Minister to
hingary. It is suggested that, for information concerning
FEISST, you contact the Biographic Intelligence Division of
the Department of State.
4. Georges MARTELLO: Well known to this office, MARTKILO is
a shady character. his office nolde extensive information a
concerning MANTELLO,&ary of which will be furnished you s
in several days..
..
Hans SELICHAN-Schurch: In addition to the information
contained in paragraph cas above, the files contain a copy
of a letter deted 8 May 1964, from the United States Consul
Genaral in Basel to the American Minister in Bern. In this
lotter the Consul General informs the Minister that the British
Consul General stated that an important German industrialist
was in Basel in April 1944 on a "peace mission". The United
States Consul General wrote that "It would appear that Mr. Hans
SELIGMAN, a formar Berlin bankar who has been conducting a
banking business here sipos 1935 under the name of Bans
SELIGMAN-Schurch and Cospary, Kaufhausgasse 7, served as an
intermediary between" the British Consulate General and a
Basel representative of the Gereen industrialist.
Minim
4. The files contain no pertinent identifiable information concerning
Count Carlo C'AMKLIO, K. A. NAMIRNO, Frits SCHURCH, or Dr. Edgar SALIN.
11. 1959
-2-
SECRET
CIA IN ERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
SECRET
shabet Bi
MEMORANDUR
SUBJECT: KAJenLLO, Georges
:
1. La smetance, the files contain the following information
concerning Subject who vas born Baruh MANDL on 11 December 1901, in the
Bucovina-transylvanis region of East Central Diroge, possibly in the
villege of Lechinta (47' 01" # 24" 21" *) in what is now Pausania. In June
or July 1942, Subject took up permanent residence in Switserland, and
bas resided in Geneva almost continuously since that time.
2. Generally described as being dishonest, unscrupulous and untrust-
vorthy, Bubject bas firmly established an unsavory business reputation
in the transactions ha has conducted over the last twenty years. In late
1943 or early 1944, Subject spont a brief tim, ove source reported that it
vas tvo veeka, in a Sviss jail for illegal gold transactions. A wewally
reliable source with wide knowledge of the European business-community
once refused to invest in a firm with which Bubject was associated
because he would have nothing to do with such a "louche" character.
bmen
3. Bubject's one determinable loyalty is to his Jewish co-religionistes
Boginning in at least September 1944, and perhape starting a few months
earlier, Bubject supplied Jews trapped in Hungary with false documentation
which enabled then to fles Hungary. Bubject was able to provide this
documentation by virtue of his position as El Salvadorian consular
representative (his exact consular title was not made clear) in Geneva
during the latter part of World War II. It has been reported that
Subject assisted persons not in favor with the Nazi's to escape from
Gersary during World War II. The files indicate that Dubject performed
most of these services without remmaration, however, at least three un-
evaluated reports state or indicate that ha sold the false documentation
be was able to provide.
4. Bubject has been frequently mentioned in cases of fales documentation.
In a report dated 16 November 1948, an official French source stated that
ons Eugene Vorciar hed freudulently obtained French passports for Subjeet,
his wife Irene, and their son Derique. bon questioned about these passports
by the French authorities, Subject stoved that VESTCIAF had been entrusted
with the task of procuring Preach citisonzaip for Bubject and his family,
that VENICLEP was to prove be kad soused French citizenship by giving Subject
and his fastly French passports, and that Bubject had never used the French
passports VEATCLEF had given them because he suspected that they bed
been obtained irregularly. Bubject's most recent knowa involvement
with illegal documentation was reported in February 1992, when Subject
was in serious trouble because an X1 Balvadorian passport be issued was
found in the possession of an Italian Communist arrested for counterfeiting
SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
3-1
14-00000
SECRET
by the police of Milan, Italy. This report, further states that the
regular El Salvadorian Cansal in Ganeva had recently received a bill
for several Ki Balvadorion stripe and seals, vhich are "obviously ordered
by Subject." The Coneul hed rupertedly referred the matter to the Priss
palics.
5. In 1951, the well-ploend souros con of known reliability
reported that Subject ves closely concerted with the Israeli Intelligence
Service (IIS). One of these sources, who vas of uninova reliability
stated that the Us had separated Subject from their service; no reasma
we given for this alleged separation. In October 1951 Büb Jest vi
partzar in the "Benqus Four La Commerce Buisse Jamrique Countrale" of
Genova, vhion supplied cover employment for 18 agents. Subject's
portar in the bank, Jack PADMA, was closely and actively associated
with IIS vert.
6. In a report dated 16. Jie 1946, a fairly reliabla sestroo
reperted that a Rumanian agent who was also a representative of the
Yugoslav Intelligsace Dervios, ves in contact with Subject and with ene
Jowaf MARDE, vhe is probably identical with Bubject's brother. In 1944
and 1946, wvaluated sources reported that Subject had been an agant of
the Gestape.
7. According to a report from the Poceral Bureau of Investigation,
"source of kasva reliability hed supplied the Bureen with a "List"
(Aleck Bock) used by efficials of the Yugoslav diplomatic and consular
sarvios. Areena who applied for Yugoslav visas were checked against
the list and, if their names appeared therein, it was necessary to seek
prior approval of the Federal Secreterist of Foreign Affairs or the
Foderal Boureterist of Interral Affairs. The basis upsn vhich the list
was scrgiled and the source of the information on the list were unitonows
to the kurosu's source. On page lll of the list, under the heading
"Isreal", appeared an entry for MARTKILO-MARIEL, Cars, (cum of Subject's
alicans) bara 12/11/01; Leschnitts.
30 have 1959
-2-
SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
14-00000
COUN
SUF..
DATE OF
INFO
PLA: FS
Dat
gary/Italy/ariseerical
Loterantionl Manipulations of
PaswArdion Ltd./Allgemanggling
to data and frien
ip to Mar 60
-
10 Kar 60
REPORT NO
00-
DATE DISTA
NO PAGES
2
REFERENCES Case 31,785
THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
SOURCE
λ.
2.
3.
مة
Brigarian national, a former asaber of the Bungarian Parliament.
Bafore World War II, source was a prominent political personality
in Pungary. As he was opposed to the alliance with Germany, the
Basto, after breaking his left leg, took him into "protective
custody in 1944. After the "liberation" of Bangary by Borlat
troope in 1945, bo was arrested for "subversive activities and
for his cutspoken critician of Comminien, and sentenced to death
which was later changed to life imprisonment. During the October
1956 revolution, he was reloased and, after the suppression of
the revolution, bo managed to escape to umtria. Source, who came
to the 3 in 1957, to wall informed on Hanperin rottem.
Maforo derbiamo
rower
Forma Bay 16. No is a poitical cores, the boods
prino siaister efter World War II. As is known, valle in
Britserlend on a visit in thay 1947, be une forced to resign