14-00000
104-10217-10219
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
3
SECRET
10 March 1966
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, CI/OA
ATTENTION:
SUBJECT:
Mr. Brevar
Darogatory Traces on QREBONY (201-306052)
1. Richard Gibson, while employed by the Columbia Broadcasting Susten,
and a fellow colleague Robert Taber established the Fair Play for Cuba
Committee (FPCC) in April 1960. Subject was fired from his job with CBS
because of his activities with FPCC. The parent organization of FPCC is
the Institute for the Improvement of Inter-American Relations. Subject vas
President of the New York Chapter of the FPCC and became Acting National
Executive Secretary of FPCC when Robert Taber went to Cuba in January 1961.
Subject in his role as Acting Executive Secretary was in contact with many
parsonalities from such organizations as Socialist Workers Party, CPUSA,
Monroe Defense Committee, the Committee to Aid tho Monroe Defendents; etc.
(see attachment). Subject vas also accredited to the United Nations as
correspondent covering. Un affairs for the Cuban newspapers El Mmdo and
Revolucion. While a member of the FPCC, he travelled in 1950 and 1961
to Cuba (specific dates mimowa) and has met Fidel Castro, Ernesto Cuevara
and various other Cuban officials.
2. Subject was involved with the Monroe Defense Committee which is
made up of Negro nationals and members of the Commmunist Party. He is well
acquainted with Robert Williams, the American Negro from Monroey Horth
Carolina, who emigrated to Cuba. Subject resigned from the FFCC in the
fall of 1962 because his income was inadequate for his services..
3. In late 1962, Subject vas recommended by the Algerian Ambassador
to the United Nations (name not given) to be on the staff of Revolution
Africains in Algiers, a paper which was then edited by Jacques Verges a
vill-known Coremmist. When Verges vas ousted by the Algerians because of
a dispute with Ben Bella in May 1963, Subject remained loyal to Verges and
set up headquarters in Lausanne for the publication of Africa, Latin America,
Asia Revolution, more commonly known as Revolution, and served as editor of
its English-language version. This publication was characterized as being
transparently a vehicle for spreading Chinese Commmunist opinions on international
and world Commmist problems. Gibson while in Lausanne worked with Fredy
Gilbert Nils Anderson, Swedish citizen, editor-publisher, who printed the
Revolution. Anderson has been known to have numerous contacts in international
leftist circles of all shades--including FLN-Algerians, Congolese, Angrlese,
other African politicians, Spanish emigrees, French "refractairs anti-colonialists",
SECRET
661
Enclosed from tarts
Gewagratag and
destassification
SECRET
etc. Despite all these contacte Anderson cannot definitely be lebelled as
a Covammist.
4. Subject on 7 November 1963 spoke to Werkgroep Informatic Cubs and
the democratic-socialist student organization POLITEIA in Amsterden. This
speech vas reported to be more anti-American rather than pro-Cuba. It vas
also reported in November 1963 (Source of this information is considered
unreliable) that the Soviet Anbassador to the Netherlands Ivan Ivanovich
Fugarinov recommended a GIBSON to the Cuban Ambassador Maristany as one
who could help them in their propaganda effort. Tugarinov said that this
GIBSON vas in Amsterdam at this time.
5. In December 1963 Subject's Sviss residence permit was not renewed
and Subject vent to Paris where he vas still editor of the English-language
version of the Revolution. Subject split with Verges in July 1954, because
he was accused of misusing his office as former Executive Secretary of FPCC
in order to penetrate the rank of the international revolutionary novement.
Ne vas accused of being an agent of the FBI and CIA. Gibson unable to find
employment in Paris vent to England in October 1964.
Attachment:
FBI Report on Subject
FBI Interview with Subject
SECRET
Ann Jane Long
CA/CE