14-00000
104-10163-10144
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
"DO" RECORD MATERIAL
1. THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
2. RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO IP/ARCHIVES,
RM GA-50, ON OR BEFORE DATE INDICATED.
3. IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
4598
FORM
13
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
1790 USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
S.
..
7.
3.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15. RETURN TO:
IP/ARD/PSU
FOAM
3-02
EDITIONS
(2-76)
1471
DE DATE
To Requester:
Please return this reference
to IP/ARD/PSU immediately after
use.
RECORDS CENTER
JOB NO. 26.741
SPACE NO.320223
FILE NO. -2Pts 100
DOCUMENT
FOLDER NO. 374
40
BOX NO.
E2 IMPDET CL BY: 062147
GA-50
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
لا
اذا
ド
UNCLASSIFIED
2
14-00000
"CS" RECORD MATERIAL
1. THIS DOCUMENT IS CHARGED TO YOU.
2. RETURN THIS DOCUMENT TO RID/ARCHIVES &
DISPOSITION SECTION, KM GE-58, ON OR BEFORE
DATE INDICATED.
3. IF YOU FORWARD THIS DOCUMENT TO ANOTHER
INDIVIDUAL PLEASE CALL EXTENSION
!
DO NOT REMOVE THIS FORM
-
FORM:
12-42
1790 LGE PREVIOUS EDITIONS.
EION-ID
482620
Ride
1471
MAILATE FOLDER.
DUE DATE
6 FEED
porme Haley lit he
EIROG 4BI
fat Heffernan
*AF/HE/C 3B2627
Pam Sleepers
IP/ARCHIVES
65-58
•Gedy Cline
CTOG/60 2844
9.
10.
١١.
12.
13.
14.
RETURN TO
15.
RID/ARD Rm GE-58
FORM
3-62
610
EDITIONS
OP-01
8.04
76-7441
18
BX 40
320221
WARZ 17445 wat,
FILE NO. Wash.12-te-107
DOCUMENT:
FOLDER:
PAGE:
374
320184
40
BOX:
SECRET
CONFIDENTIAL
INTERNAL
USE ONLY
UNCLASSIFIED
14-00000
MATTEL, Arthur
-
PORTUGAL
S.C.E.
Belgian, took part in the Spanish civil war on side of the REDS. 2895/44
After Franco's victory he escaped to France from where, after thell/11/44
occupation, he got over illegally, throuch Spain, to Portugal. The
Portuguese police arrested him and placed him in Caxias prison on
the charge of having contacts with various international Communists.
He was a former employee of the French I.S. and was active in that
capacity in Marseille during the war. Subject escaped to Portugal
and was arrested there. After paying 12,000 Ean to Dr. Armindorde
FORONEA a friend of a friend of a certain Cerreia de ALMEIDA of the
PVDE police, he left prison. He worked for GORLIER. According to
information dated 1/9/44, he was again arrested by the Portuguese police
and place in Peniche prison.
ojd
ULX-2 PTS-107
Doc #374 jace/w
FILMED
113730
DOC. MICRON
XAR2-17445
11720044.
14-00000
MICROFILIVED
JUL 28 1962
DOC. MICRO. SER.
THE ARTHUR BATTEL CONTACTS of sulyet who world
Joy bersiar, Free Fesuch. Vreby trends,
Wintu Still cand aus. t. Jos
The fo'lowing list of names was compiled from the WATTEL report. Suspict
With few exceptions (noted in the text), the information on each person nilon at
is substantially WATTEL'S own comment, colored by his prejudices and
tailored here and there to fit his role of double agent. It is prob
ably full of errors and falsehoods.
مه
Agat
WATTEL onde these contacts between the months of December, 1942,
and September, 1943. They are numerous and varied, ranging from hotel
chambermaids to an intimate friend of Salasarts". Some of these people
he employs, many of then use his; and he is, or was, paid by alls by us,
by the Gormans, and in services, perhaps even in money, by the Free French,
the Vichy French, and the Lisbon Police. The result was inevitables on
September 18, 1943, we severed all connections with him.
MARCES, CELESTIN CHEYX, alias JEAN RENAULT, ARTHUR WATXEL
Д43,
:
3, rua Bociedade Farmaceutica,
Porteral
Citir helgisens
Height, 1.70 m.; weight, 64 kgs.; brown hair and blu, eyes, age 36
Speaks no foreign languages. Has a common-law wife, Antoinette/Lhermino,
and a small daughter, in France.
occ
POR FRONDON
3.1707
According to British reports, subject was born in Parisjon June 3,
1907. Claina to have been a stock broker in Paris before the war, prob-
able worked for the 2e Bureau. During the war was attached to the Hin-
istry of Agriculture, through the influence of Cusille. In 1940 he was
in southern France, then went into hiding in Toulouse, for unknown reasons.
He has never explained satisfactorily the large suns of money which he had
in his possession when he finally escaped to Barcelona on September 5, 1942,
and then to Liston, where he opened an account with the Dance Fiه ماس
Bottomsiur. Subject arxived in Portugal with a Nicaraguan passport, yot
professed to be a Belgian. He was arrested October 21, and released from
pritom six vooks later with the help of Noronha; was then engaged by the
Cornan Intelligence service. Later, he also worked for us, through Gorlier.
Subject lived for a time at the Hotel Rosa, Caldas da Rainha, then the
Hotel Europa, Lisbon. Next, he moved to No. 27, rua Astor Isidoro, ground
floor, right. He hue also lived on the rua Trombeta. Subject was ro-
arrested, apparently as a communist agent but very probably at the in-
stigation of the British, on July 31, 1943, and lodged in Aljube prison.
When last heard from, in September, he had been released, was bearer of
• Coruan passport, and had been promised by the Germans the fob of couter
on the Tangier-Liston zun.
Wo-11-2 PT5-107
Doe #274200 1to Hary-17445
KAK2-17445
i
14-00000
-2-
سنم
ALDEANO, Stefan
Caldes da Rainha, sof
(:
..
い
Described by the British as "our Rumanian client in Caldos." Gorlier,
of the Free French Forces, Introduced WATTEL to his in Decenter, 142, and
asked him to be of help to WATTEL.
y.
ALMEIDA, Hugo de cit:
Portregal
Ex-Captain of the SS Exportador
Portuguese ship which serried
Germen contrabend before It was sunk. He ses recruited by Luitterd,
MALAKILA ALUKILA, (Cept) Capt) Jose Correia d' (Oliveira?) cit. Po
X
Portregan
wh
Inspector of the Lisbon Police and right arm of an importrat Police
Captain. He is 1.65 to 1.68 m. tall, has brown hair, a ruady face and a
heavy build. Traveis a lot in taxis and is known to frequent the Cafe Nacional
and the Bar Imperial. Both Wettel and Noronha speak of nie sa en la ortant eod
devoted caliaborator of the Germans; he is said to be the head of the Portuguese
group that is in Germany, and is in the particular good graces of the Gestap
The arrest of Loureiro, in the "Portuguese Passport case, Halles states, ...
for the purpose of getting information about the French Componist organization
for the Gerdans. His known agents, besides Wattel, are Victor Copta and
Paul'da Cunha, He meets his agents at Noronha's, usually atour: 72.8.
made good use of Wattel after securing his release from jail in December, 1942
smploying him in the Loureiro case, as cut-out in other coutnots,
agent
provocateur at Aljube Prison, im August, when Luis Pires was put in Wettel's
cell, and to introduce him to the panicurist at the Palace Hotel.
G'AMADE
Of the Vichy Legation. In Hay, Ostins gave a farewell diner in his
honor. Subject openly declared that he would contact the Americans in Madrid;
beth Ostins end Honnier knew of this.
Kanceling cit: Portre Portiezal
HANNES ORALARIDA, Marcelino
1.10. Portugal
"Corrector (runner) at the Hotel Metropole. Each morning,st the door
of the Hetropole, subject receives information from Pascoal PEREIRA, aight
porter of the Hotel Biropa. He is violentiy pro-German and sivaya carries
a list of Anglophiles in his pocket.
POPARCEAU, PARCE (Major) (Colonel?) Henri (Assesul) Cit. France?
work for the Germans,
Other sources report subject to be a Vichy Frenchman, doing espionage
Is believed to have been an Honorary Consul In the
Colonies; is often seen with Irmengart da Costa. Police Capt. d'Oliveira
received a report on subject from his agent, Paul de Cunhe. Another source
reporte that a Frenchman by this name is believed to have received 15,000
escudos from Fettel. Only trace of such a zan is the report, dated Mey, 1941,
of a Col. Arceau, an ex-Governor of the French colonies, who was anti-Vichy, penniless
and ready to serve anywhere, but was not to be trusted.
14-00000
ANGIE, Eugenio (see Cuten Consul-Coneral) at: Cubes
Formerly was in the employ of the Cuban Connuiete in Maarid. He spent
15 months in jail for dostlar la contratand. Here he asst Moroane who gave
hin certain dollar checks. Subject ieft for Cute, vis Sain, ca Janwry 25,
1943. His sacrese la Estrada Pains, 401 Viboare, Havana, Cume, le corres-
poede with ais motor the lives in the 1.6.
Of Rusanion origin, former Secretary to Mann, Jourenai in ra. To
Wattel, he looks like an Intoretionel crook. He has contects with the Ger-
sand, and some connections with Cat. Carvalho Munes. Phoned once to t
Carian (Tel: 52001). Was a guest at the dianer party given by Pangal
t
Ahotel des Das Roses, Listen Pratone!
DONC 1892
occ
Germen engineer; age 51. In content with the Germans and with
Hungarich who does espionage in Portugal. Irmengert da Costa is his assistant.
BALA. Antonio Cit:
Portugal
Becond "corrector (runner) at the Hotel Metropole. Subject receives in-
formation from Julio, runner at the Hotel Luro,e where the straen of the British
Commercial Airlines stay, and posses it on to Cuaresma, aight porter of the
Metropole who, in turn, gives it to the Germans when they stop by for it each
day. Subject worked at the Hotel Francfort, Rossio, for many years. Clains
to bo Anglophile, but will do anything for money.
BARADES (or Paradee)
Of the French Legation. Priate telephones 61391. Sontacts tire
BATISTA, JOSO
Cit: Portugal membing
Het Noronha in prison. Jold him of a ro-Allied group, of which he was
a sember, that planned to blow up bridges in the event of a Certen inesioan
This information was not revealed at the tria.s; Noronha repeated it to the
Police. Subject was exiled to Portuguese Africa and imprisoned.
BEDOS (or Redon)
A friend of Horonha's. Is either a sester of a Gerasa firm or connected
with the Portuguese Air Navigation Co.
20
L
14-00000
BRAVEHISTE, Jacques (Isaac) RENVENISTE
A 45 rua de Santa Marte,
at Portal
DON-C111
According to a British report, subject is a Portuguese of French origini
a Jew, about 32 years old, who has lived all his life in France. Bettel wont
1911 to son his upon arriving in Liston and when Wettel was arrested, subject put
Horonha in touch with him. Subject was in stocking business in Paris until
Hey 1940; is now, in his oimi words, engaged in petites affaires" in Lisbon.
Professes to be pro-Briti
BIBERFELD, Dr.
Was Wettal's physician during his illness in May.
cit: Qustrassed by effecer who you
BIG CHIFT - Geraan
200
:
e who you arthur
KNEPTEE ON MARIEL
NEPER
thy 1.5 info
26 probably an officer and is/seld, by some, to be an Austrian. Haris 24 NLIC
2HLICH
do Lus, Bettel's mistress, says thet he is an Austrian Jew, given the title
of pure Iryan for services rendered his country, end is under the immediate
erders of Colonel Schmidt. She states, further, that he has a business in
Lisbon and drives CD car Ho. LA402102. Subject is about 45, 1.75 m. tall,
of heavy build, with light hair and blue eyes. He has a high forehead and
thin mouth. His expression is energetier vehen angered, he must be ferocious.
Subject described American Intelligence Service to Mattel and gave his con-
plote list of personnel. Wanted Wattel to work on the Americans and the
French, on the Gaullist movement in France, in particular. Subject inter-
waned with the Police and Foreign Office in August and had Wattel released
from prison. In conversation with Wattel, he showed he had no illusions about
Gersany winning the war.
BLECH, George
Avonide lace Hotel,
Botas, Lisbon, Porteryal
Work for both British Infailigence and the Portuguern Secret Service.
Ho denounced Wattel to the police.
BLEGHETU. Costa.
Sometine in Bay, subject's name was pronounced, in Wettel's presence, by
the "Big Chief who asked his assistant (Quittard?) if he had received "the
reporty.
GRANDES Hang
>
Cit: servary?
!
In June, Ellerlein phoned subject from Avenida Palace Hotel.
14-00000
-2-
ALDEANO, Stefan
Caldes da Rainha, sof
(:
..
い
Described by the British as "our Rumanian client in Caldos." Gorlier,
of the Free French Forces, Introduced WATTEL to his in Decenter, 142, and
asked him to be of help to WATTEL.
y.
ALMEIDA, Hugo de cit:
Portregal
Ex-Captain of the SS Exportador
Portuguese ship which serried
Germen contrabend before It was sunk. He ses recruited by Luitterd,
MALAKILA ALUKILA, (Cept) Capt) Jose Correia d' (Oliveira?) cit. Po
X
Portregan
wh
Inspector of the Lisbon Police and right arm of an importrat Police
Captain. He is 1.65 to 1.68 m. tall, has brown hair, a ruady face and a
heavy build. Traveis a lot in taxis and is known to frequent the Cafe Nacional
and the Bar Imperial. Both Wettel and Noronha speak of nie sa en la ortant eod
devoted caliaborator of the Germans; he is said to be the head of the Portuguese
group that is in Germany, and is in the particular good graces of the Gestap
The arrest of Loureiro, in the "Portuguese Passport case, Halles states, ...
for the purpose of getting information about the French Componist organization
for the Gerdans. His known agents, besides Wattel, are Victor Copta and
Paul'da Cunha, He meets his agents at Noronha's, usually atour: 72.8.
made good use of Wattel after securing his release from jail in December, 1942
smploying him in the Loureiro case, as cut-out in other coutnots,
agent
provocateur at Aljube Prison, im August, when Luis Pires was put in Wettel's
cell, and to introduce him to the panicurist at the Palace Hotel.
G'AMADE
Of the Vichy Legation. In Hay, Ostins gave a farewell diner in his
honor. Subject openly declared that he would contact the Americans in Madrid;
beth Ostins end Honnier knew of this.
Kanceling cit: Portre Portiezal
HANNES ORALARIDA, Marcelino
1.10. Portugal
"Corrector (runner) at the Hotel Metropole. Each morning,st the door
of the Hetropole, subject receives information from Pascoal PEREIRA, aight
porter of the Hotel Biropa. He is violentiy pro-German and sivaya carries
a list of Anglophiles in his pocket.
POPARCEAU, PARCE (Major) (Colonel?) Henri (Assesul) Cit. France?
work for the Germans,
Other sources report subject to be a Vichy Frenchman, doing espionage
Is believed to have been an Honorary Consul In the
Colonies; is often seen with Irmengart da Costa. Police Capt. d'Oliveira
received a report on subject from his agent, Paul de Cunhe. Another source
reporte that a Frenchman by this name is believed to have received 15,000
escudos from Fettel. Only trace of such a zan is the report, dated Mey, 1941,
of a Col. Arceau, an ex-Governor of the French colonies, who was anti-Vichy, penniless
and ready to serve anywhere, but was not to be trusted.
14-00000
-5-
BUHAGIAR, Zaidio
cit: Portugal?
Been in Wattel's company at the cafes in Caldas da Rainha.
BURCKHARD
Roon 74, Avenida Palace Hotel
He is known as Kreel's "right are".
Pastelaria (for) ALIANCA - Noronha set Wattel or Mrs. Lisas here at different
tines.
Cafe ARGENTINA - back of Restaurant Portugal, Rossio - Watiel has eaten here.
CHARCUTERIE FRANCAISE - Wattel lunchos here and receives telephone calls.
Cafe do CHIADO - Here, Wattel, Noronha and Cant. d'Almeida set in March.
Cafe CRISTAL - Frequented by Noronha. He has been seen here with several
poople, and once alone with an Italian.
Bar IMPERIAL - Wattel, Noronha and Capt. d'almeida met here twice in April.
1
Cafe NACIONAL - Frequented by Capt. d'Almeida
Cafe NICOLA - Another meeting place for Noronha and his contacts.
Cafe (Recteurent) PORTUGAL, Rossio - Wattel and Loureiro met here April 1st.
TOTAL For - Antonio Fontes, agent for Quittard, often seen here.
TEA FOON, Jus do Almanda - Frequented by the "Big Chief.
YIVOLI Dar - In Hay, Tattel ordered to watch an Italian diplomat, a good
customer of this bar, reported to be working for the Americans.
VACCARIA AUREA, rua Crucifixo - A hang-out of foreign sailors and a favorite
of Quaresmen, porter at the Hotel Metropole.
14-00000
CALLEJA, Pascal
According to a
Cut: UK?
DOR-C 1874
SexF
British report, subject is a Halteregout 50, living
in Caldes da Rainha Holand his mistress, Josephine Heeye, e Belgien,
vero considered by the Germans for employment as agents, but were turned doen.
Subject complains of unfair British treatment. He has been connected with
shady deals in foreign currencies and precious metals. Is seen with Mattel
&& the gates in Caldes.
CANBEIRA, Agostino Jose Cat: Po
Portu
Porterjal:
offoportom:Uicated in the "tin affair". Knows things that would
compromise certein people in the United Kingdon Corp., and secure his own
release.
CAMPELO
An Engineer. Telephoned fron the Avenida Palace Hotel to 45967, Avenida
5 de Outubro, 53.
CARVALHO MUNES,(Cort)
Is in some way connected with bechet. Was a quest at a dinner given
by Pangal in June.
CASANOVA, Dr. Alves
when he was
Battel's Doctore suffering from lung trouble in Aljube prison, حن
August. He is also Hne. Maller's physician.
/cast cit. Portal Possibl Britill: agent.
He disclosed that Wattel was arrested at the request of the Britishi
asked that this information be trested as confidentiai. British informsd
Folice that Fattel was bearer of false passports, and that he was a communist,
consorting with Terechenko, Dr. Gile, Grombergh and Mons. Clarec. Subject
stated Wattel would be released if Americans requested it and provided him
with means of leaving coustry.
CHATEL. (Governor) Cut: Francis
:.
Both the British and the Germans vere interested in subject and σαχώς
to have him leave Portugal. Subject is rexted by another source to be
representative of the French Red Cross in He is Fiendly to Wattel
6
*
14-00000
-7-
and at one time wanted to have his sent to North Afrins. He was also friendly
with the ex-Legionnaire, Paul da Cunna, who was a police sont end prepared a
report on subject for Capt. d'oliveira. Mattel reports that subiect does not
use code for secret correspondence, and in May Battel was offering to photostd
his letters. Regarding leaks from autjespa office, Unttei blased not Paul da
Cunha, but subject's secretary, Helene de Meillet, a pro-Nazi, accusing her of
devulging information to Oliveira who, through d'Almeida, passed it on to the
Citretingut et To Love.
Chatil & Belevad 18.
Gorizane
1
CHAVES, Henrique Cit:
Portugal
70
Is an aginas. In Juge, phoned to 62770, rus Garcia de Orte, 15, from
the Avenida Palace Hotel, Lambon, Porter jat
KHARAC. (Consul-General) Cit: France
Hotel Avis
General Giraud's delegate; he arrived in June. In August, British ro
ported his to the police as one of the suspicious en in contact with Wattel,
:
Is married. Has a guest at the dinner given by Pengel in June.
be worked with the American, Hold (7) in the "tin affairs. Involved
in this scandel, he offered large suns for certain reitet maps of the Port
uglese possessions in order to have something to offer in teleage for hie
freedon, Is reported in contact with the Cervans.
COUCEICAO, Maris da
Cit. Portiegot
SF
No. 72, rua da Palms, aber Portuges
Bubject works for Quittard. Her husband was arrested by the PDF for
espionage in maritime circies.
COUDES
Esrchant, and financier of pro-Allied group that piegned to ilow up
bridges in the event of a German invasion. Use jailed as a result of Jose
Batistas indiceretions in prison, and Horophets betrayal to the Police,
1.
14-00000
-10-
his Legation repeatedly on May 27, 1943. Believed to have had a large sun
of money deposited to his account in a Portuguese benk.
FERRARI, Hygina
ct: Shi
Sex: F
Reported, in May, to be a member of the Intelligence Service, although
no longer working for the British. As an Italian and a friend of the Ital-
ih ostis she was considered a double agent.
FISCHER, Karl Cit: Liermeng
In June, phoned to 61872, rua 8.Joao da Mata, 117, from the Avenida
Palace Hotel.
FONSECA, Nue, de
Daughter of Jean Loy, of Bofina. Quest at the farewell dinner given by
Ostins of the Vichy Legation on May 27, for the d'Amade family.
FRENCH AGENT (ich)
Probably from Nice; about 1.75 m. tall; dull complexion and carries him-
self in a peculiar sanner. Works for the German Intelligence Service. Came
especially from Paris in June to contact Wattel, to get him to re-establish
his connections with forner colleagues of the 2e Bureau, now working in the
French "Secret Army".
A FRENCHMAN
Contacted Noronha on April 19. Had beer. in Portugal 7 months. He is
about 32, has a large mouth, pointed nose, dark brosa hair and sunken cheeks.
GARBER
Room 73, Avenida Palace Hotel
A Cerman. On June 10th, telephoned to the German Legation, 63170, and
the German Minister, 64417.
Bubject re orted to the Police by the British as one of the suspicious
men in contact with Wattel.
14-00000
-11-
GOMBERGH,
In July was arrested with Wattel, and others, by tus P.V.D.R., apparently
as part of an anti-Bolshevice drive. British, in August, reported subject
to police as one of the suspicious men in contact with Wattel.
CORLIER, (ur) (Grolier?)
Pertemal
DeGaulle's representative in Lisbon, with offices in the British Embassy.
From other sources we learn that subject was the intermediary
Wattel
and the Americans. The British report that Wattel went to see Gorlter upon
coming out of prison in December 1942, and told of the offer he had received
from the Germans. Wattel states that subject receives collaborationists who
pretend to be deGaullists and that one of his (Wattel's) first missions for
the Corsans was to steal from subject's office the dossiers of refugees in
transit through Lisbon. There are leaks from subject's office to Portuguese
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
COURSIER, Mr. and Mrs.
They were guests on May 27 at the farewell dinner given by Cetins of
the Vichy Legation for the d'Amade family.
BAGAL
Was guest at the dinner given by Pangal in June. Is married.
Pastrayal
Baployee of the British Passport Control Offices Other sources reveal
that he is the British official who, for a price, helped to secure a Navicert
for an Italian at Caldas da Rainha. Mrs. Popper, closely connected with
Bruno Mayer, is his mistress. He kept writing to Gorlier to inquire about
Vattells frequent visits, and has been behind most of the plots against Fattol
for he knows the latter is watching him. Wettol states that ovory passports
issued by subject is reported to Germans.
HOHENLOHE PRINCE
Is reported to have been at the Avoside Palace Hotel, incoguito, on
May 22. Neither Wattel nor the British were able to identify nime
Falit
14-00000
-12-
HOTEL, AVENIDA PALACE
Room 11 Paliossi
Roon 12 - Masaustein (Hassenstein?)
Room 41- Marcel Zelich
Roon 53 Merinho de Crus
Room 68-Iberlein
Room 73 Gerber
Room 74 Burckhardt
Room 118 Dr. Kreel
Room 165 - Simplicio Sentos
Other guests: George Blech, Prince Hohenlohe, Cometessede Noronhe
Believed to be guestas Mue. Legeny, Pangal, Bacuet, Karl Fischer, Henriques
Chaves, Campelo, Bruno Mayer, Ismail (Bey
Wattel has the hotel watched. One cashier works for both the Allies and the
Axis, but the telephone operator, in May, was in his pay, reporting the French
and Portuguese messages only. Wattel had the hotel register copied and the
chambermaids were paid for the contents of certain wastebaskets.
HOTEL FUROPA
The cirsen of British Commercial Air Lines stop hare.
Julio the "corrector", runner
Pasccal Pereira - night porter
HOTEL METHOPOLE
Marcelino Antunes de Almeida - "corrector", rummer
✓
Antonio Sais - seccad corrector
Jose Ribeiro Quaresin - night porter
Arrested with Wattal and others, by P.V.D.Z., in Julyg apparently as pert
of en Panti-Bolshevist drive.
14-00000
-13-
X
:
ISMAEL BAT (Ismail
Egyption Minister. He conducts his business from the Avenida Palaco
Hotel. He is now more careful of his speech and of his "conquests". In
August, he employed Paul da Cunha, upon Wattel's recommendation, but dismissed
his at the end of a week for espionage activities.
JORGE, (or George)
33 rua Misericordia
:
Fattel was ordered, in July, to contact a former French officer of the
2. Bureau named "Jorge", living here. Another source states that Jorge
may be "George", our "no. 14", whose office is at this address.....
JULIO
Corrector (runner) et the Hotel Europe where the airmen of the British
Commerttel Airlines stay. Passes on his information to Bais, runner at the
Hotel Metropole.
KAHAN Leonide
Jacbon, Portugal
Aistercambio, Ltda., No. 15, rus dos Fanqueiros, 5th floor.
This man is a suspect..
bivas li
Reimary?
ONEPPER! (Knepfert) (Seb "Big Chief". Marcel Zehlich) th
po
DORC 18931
7
thepector General of German Intelligence Surzice, Travels on a Turkish
proaport; is said to have been born in Turkey but has Germen nationality. From
Lisbon, returned to Budapest. Wattel says he sey be the "Big Chief" for the
description fits; about 51 and fairly heavy. With Quittard, was instigator
of the Hattel mission to seise the machines on the British planes at Sintra.
KOVALE AKO. Count (see Kowaleukg)
In mrried, Was a guest at the dinner given by Pangal in June. A
Hee. Meny phoned to him.
Cut.
Jet Pil
Polish Intelligence Bervice, ""Big Chief wanted Hettel, who had found
a way to approach his, to give him the pictures of the 12,000 murdered Polish officers.
t
14-00000
-14-
i
Dr) or KPELL (believed to be the same)
KREEL, DT
Room 118, Avenida Palace Hotel
Occ
Subject is Princess Amelia's lawyer. His present activities, however,
have little to do with his profession; he appeers to be the end of the
itical section of Gorman Intelligence. He was appointed upon Knefper's
arrival; he is in constant touch with his Legation, but his instructions
cose directly from the central service. When the "big Chief was in Lisboa,
subject was seen in his company. Burckhardt is his "right arm"; be coafers
with "Frits"; Ostins, of the Vichy Legation, whose guest he was at the fare-
well dinner for d'Amade, is under his orders and sees him daily. Subject
is married and spends his week-ends at Villa Bella, Estoril (Tel: 608),.
house known to be rented to a Geraan couple and used as a meeting-place.
LAGENY Madane
From the Avenida Palace Hotel, in June, phone 62684- Conde Chanbeki,
Estoril 426 - Kowalasks, 51011 - Estoril 326 - Polish Legation, 6195 -
Rumanian Legatior, 62193 - Hungarian Legation, 45629.
LATOUR
An important man in France, an officer of the Legion of Honor, whose
anti-Semitic campaign had gained him many enemies. He thought Wattel was
an caissary from Algiers and trusted him because Mme. de Noronha had vouched
for his. Wattel and Chatel both urged him to contact Monnier, and Wettel
persuaded him to attend Ostin's farewell dinner for d'Amade, of the Vichy
Legation.
Wattel advises egainst contacting him; states that subject may te
leaning toward the British or he may be seting under orders from Chetal er
Corier. His position is not at all clear.
Frich Mie
THEMANH
Lehmann?)
In Jure was interested with Wattel in getting some merchandise into
Spain.
14-00000
-15-
LICENSE PLATES
(CDP) car No. HX 10-20 parked at Heronta's door is registered in
the name of Helnant Robert, German Consular Secretary.
CD car No. 14402102 is said to belong to the "Big Chief", Wattel
boss and Colonel Schmidt's assistent.
LINAS (tre) (allia de Gracia Mate Limeat)
+
SLUF
Cat Portugal
Wattel's good friend, for some time, at least. Mattel says: "I
don't think that is. Lines is a very bright person, but she is well-tred,
has good culture, and a very strong will. He claims to have trained her,
to have "noral power over nor, and seintains s..e is a person devulod to
the Allied cause who has, indirectly, furnished information to the British
At Wattel's urging, she met Horonne and