1104-10072-10241
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
13 April 1970
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting With WUSLAB/1 on 10 April 1970
1. Security and Arrangements: The meeting took place at
[WUSLAB/1's home where he is still recuperating from his eye
operation. I had to delay my arrival from 1200 until 1230,
and I phoned him concerning the delay. He answered the door
and we went upstairs where we sat in an upstairs study. I left
at about 1400.
2. Production: WUSLAB/1 said that Jose Raul Viera Linares
had phoned him at his home at about 1100 on 8 April. Viera said
that a friend had described to him an acquaintance who had had
an eye problem similar to WUSLAB/1 (or words to that effect),
and that, Viera now realized the seriousness of the case and
that WUSLAB/1 would not be able to travel. Viera said that
the chances were now remote that he would be returning to New
York. A friend of his named "Rogelio" would contact (WUSLAB/17
He did not say, when or where, but it would be when circumstances
permit. (WUSLAB/17 asked if Viera might be assigned to another
foreign country. Viera did not deign to answer this question.
3. I asked (WUSLAB/17 what he considered the possibilities
of recruiting Viera were. He thought an important factor would
be Vieras liking of comfort and security. He would not be
(motivated by money, but he did like good living. He also pro-
bably did not like living in Havana, and would not like to stay
there for a very long period. (W/1 thought that if Viera came
out to a country such as Spain that contact with him could
easily be developed In the United States Viera was on his
guard. Also in the United States Viera did not have high level
contacts with the local government, whereas in other countries
he would be expected to have such contacts. Some of those con-
tacts might then be also in contact with U.S./officials and you
could get a cross-check on Viera. I told WUSLAB/17 that we would
finish the PCQ form for Viera the next time we get together.
4. Carlos Antonio Carrasco, the National Director for
Education Planning, (visited WUSLAB/1 on 957 April 1970. Carrasco
claimed that the Bolivian government is in a period of stalemate.
There is progress being made in only two fields. One of these
is planning and the other is education. The Minister of Education
Mariano Baptista has more power than some of the other ministers.
14-00000
2
-
The education budget has been increased, and he has some say
Even
in the selection of the Ministry of Education's personnel.
though the military blocked appointments for Maria Elba Gutierrez
and Professor Chavez they are still in the ministry; Chavez in
the "Instituto Normal" and Maria Elba as Secretary General of
the Ministry (the third ranking post in the ministry.) Baptista
has good relations with the United States which is helping the
The cabinet seems to be rather stable at
education program.
the moment, although there continues to be pressure to remove
The latter is a candidate to
Rolon Anaya and Marcelo Quiroga.
replace Juan Lechin Oquendo as the secretary general of the
union organization. The strongest military man in the govern-
ment from the standpoint of firmness is Edmundo Valencia, the
Minister of National Economy.
5. The civilian cabinet members believe that the United
They think that the military are
States is happy with them.
There has been no in-
incapable of running the government.
dication of a seandle among the cabinet members.
a freeze on Bolivian-US relations.
There is also
The military continues to
be worried because there is not a political party behind the
government. Some of the civilians wanted to gain the support
of the MNR, but the military did not want to do that.
6. Carrasco gave one example of the military-civilian
interplay: The Minister of Education Baptista wanted the education
bill signed on 9 April 1970 which is the anniversary of the 1952
revolution. Valencia opposed it because it was the anniversary.
Colonel Juan-Ayoroa continues to be opposed to the return of MNR
people to the government.
7. Hernan Siles when he was in Bolivia saw Losada, Baptista,
The reason for his removal from the
Arellano denounced Siles to General
Torres
Colonel
and twice saw Ovando.
country is as follows:
Torres and gave him some written material on a plot.
then announced that there was a plot set for 9 April.
Ayoma called Siles in and said that he had to leave Bolivia
within four days. The government wanted him out of the country
on 9 April. Ayoroa told Siles that he could return to Bolivia
on 10 April. Carrasco received the above story from Siles to
whom he talked many times. Ovando believes that Siles is no
He is interested in
longer interested in governmental power.
the MNR, and he does want to destroy the political power of
While in Bolivia Siles allienated Serate-
Victor Paz Estenssoro.
Reich, Arellano, etc. Siles attributes to Arellano his betrayal
to the government.
SECRET
14-00000
-
3-
8. Nothing has happened on Paz's negotiations with the
government.
9. The arrival of the Soviet Ambassador has produced good
The
It
consequences according to Carrasco. Relations are smoother
with the American ambassador. The Bolivians feel freer to be
more friendly knowing there is someone else to turn to.
Soviet presence is a sop to placate the left in Bolivia.
serves as a substitute for the lack of leftist participation
in the government. Ovando may use the Soviets as the need
arises, just as he will try and use the Americans.
10. Ovando and Torres wanted to expelt a Colonel Liman
who is a very right-wing government employee. The military
opposed it and he is still in his job.
Ovando has been thinking
of a constituent assembly as a device to legalize his government.
He very much wants a legal presidency.
11. Plans: WUSLAB/13C will be returning to limited office
work the week of 139 April. I promised to call him during the
week. (A cable was sent on the Viera information on 10 April.)
FLOYD B. MCCULLY
SECRET