14-00000
104-10181-10161
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
XAAZ-17359
10 September 1956
CONTACT REPORT
Biographic information
on
Richard SNYDER
developed at 18 Sep 56 meeting
1. The undersigned had dinner with Subject this date. Subject
is a personal friend.
2. Subject is a member of the Foreign Service of some years'
standing. He has a flair for foreign languages, speaks
French, German and Russian, has some Japanese, having just returned
from a tour of duty. He is in addition, a well informed and keen
political analyst.
3. Subject graduated from Yale University in June 1943. He
took a pre-course for Foreign Service at M.I.T., and then took a
year's graduate work (Chinese language) in General Studies at Yale.
Leaving Yale in June 1949, he came to Washington and, having applied
for employment with the Agency, was picked up by OPC. In OPC, he
attended OSS Operations Courses then existing, and then worked
desk, until approximately 14-1950, at which time his Foreign
Service appointment came up.
4. Entering the Foreign Service, Subject went through routine
training, and then went to Germany in some type of Eastern category.
During his two years in Germany, the first six months or so performing
consular work at the Kreis (:) level, and the last two years
doing consular duties. Subject was then assigned to Japan. There
he spent the first year in a U. S. Information Service assignment
at Hitats, and the second year doing consular work at the Embassy
in Tokyo. Returning to the United States in March 1956, Subject
elected to specialize in Russian Area studies. He was accepted
and sent to Middlebury this summer for language work. He is now
completing a year's graduate work in Russian Studies at Harvard.
5. At Harvard, Subject is scheduled to take Soviet Economic
System under Domar, Russian History and Culture from Pipes,
etc., and Russian Literature. Subject also plans to select other courses,
etc., in the fall. Following the year's work, the probability
is that he will be assigned to the Embassy in Moscow.
6. Subject was asked about the university and Agency friends
he is in touch with. The answer is almost none--i.e., he
occasionally, Subject recalled having known
analysis at the Japan Desk, namely Harry Little and a
12011748/209
13-3
ABSTRACT/INDEX
DATE 18 Sep 56
CS COPY
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
201-745009
2490
-2-
7. At this point I suggested to Subject that he could help
out a great deal while at Harvard, by keeping in regular touch
with us specifically, people chasing certain languages and areas,
etc., and professors planning to travel to the East, people
whose qualifications and talents are appropriate to our interests
in such and such areas.
8. Subject completely agreed, volunteered to help in any way
he might be useful, and gave his address which he promised would be
secure with him and he would burn immediately. We both agreed that
for such a person official haste, would be better correspondents than
we are quarterly. I also mentioned that I was in Boston at least
three times, and would drop in to see him on my next trip.
9. Subject is at present about thirty-five years old. Stands
about 5'2" in height, weighs 160, wears rimless glasses, has light
brown hair, straight back, pronounced widow's peak, beginning
to bald. He is married, and they have three girls, the oldest of whom
is in school.
10. Subject and I discussed a wide range of topics, but principally
the Foreign Service and its attractions for him. He is well satisfied
with his choice of career. His principal attraction to it, however, is
the opportunity for foreign travel and residence and the responsibility
based on the 789. He is not averse to the selection system, including
its training program. He thinks the Service is doing well by him
in its training program.
11. My interest in him, from an operational point of view, has been
a long standing feeling that Subject might well be the type to cooperate
with us without revealing such a fact to the Department. Should
a breach of faith be involved and if good and sufficient reasons
exist, he would be trusted in the Agency's objectives
and would still be with the Agency today if he had not been
attracted by the prestige and status of the Foreign Service. The totally
matter of fact manner in which he treated my suggestion re reporting and
contact with us, I think, supports my views.
12. Subject's address in Boston is: 15 More St., Brookline,
Massachusetts.
Belson K. Brickman

