1000000
104-10332-10006
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CONFIDENTIAL
7 January 1994
in
file
CDO guideline
names
Cuba)
MEMORANDUM FOR:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
FROM:
Bryant Rogers
MEETING WITH LINDA FLORES
SUBJECT:
REFERENCE:
On 6 Jan we met with Linda Flores from the DO to discuss HPG concerns with regard to CIA's contacts in the 60's with well
known Cubans and Cuban Organizations.
The outcome of this discussion was that the DO agrees that we can release the names of those major players with whom CIA
worked with as long as we stay within the 60-63 time frame, with some overlap into 1964 for continuity, when needed. We then
discussed our relationships with major anti-Castro organizations. It was agreed that we could release the fact that as a funding vehicle
for the US Govt, CIA provided support including funding in general terms. In some cases we may find it necessary to reveal gross ballpark
figures for annual budgets. The DO would prefer that we continue to protect specific funding amounts where possible. They were
specifically concerned about releasing specific amounts paid to individuals or families of Bay of Pigs members where individuals could
claim that one was paid more than another. In supporting these organizations it was acknowledged by the DO that we could release
generic operational activities such as publishing journals or financing goodwill tours by prominent exile Cubans to Latin America The DO
reminded us that in reviewing these relationships with Cubans and organizations, it was important to protect CIA personnel, agents and
assets and any specifics on tradecraft.
When asked about Bay of Pigs training sites, Linda felt that the actual location should still be protected in spite of the fact that
they have been mentioned in open literature.
With regard to DO location numbers (19 for Cuba) she thought this was OK for the 60-63 time frame but would check with LA
Div. She had no problem with the release of the Bell location in cables since it was no longer used.
CC:
J. Barry Harrelson @ DA
Richard D. Kovar-Y- @ DA
John F. Pereira @ DA
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
SECRET
1
JFK
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Chief, Historical Review Group
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
DO, Focal Point for ARRB
Position on Release of Cryptonyms, Country
Designators, Action Indicators and Employee True
Names
During the period since the ARRB last met, the DO has
considered the four issues listed below that have not yet been
addressed with the Board. These issues appear throughout the JFK
collection and by stating our position up front we hope to
facilitate the Board's review and to reach an agreement that will
be mutually satisfying to the Board and the Agency.
Cryptonyms - Except for cryptonyms related to
operational assets or activities involving Mexico or Miami,
the Agency will release the main component of cryptonyms and
withhold only the two-letter digraph. Treating cryptonyms
in this manner will protect the nationalities of individuals
and operations that are not pertinent to Oswald or the JFK
investigation and render an easier reading of the written
material.
Country File Designators We will delete the first
element of operational activity and operational interest
files in those instances when the credibility of the
narrative is not affected. The first element of the file
number corresponds to the alphabetical position of the
country name which is easily discernible, whereas the
subsequent two elements relate to type of activity or
interest and specific subject.
Action Indicator (Slug) Lines Generally, we will
release the entire action indicator line of a document.
Occasionally, however, we will withhold portions when the
CL BY (0695930
DECL OADR
DRV HUM 4-82
SECRET
1
13-00000
SECRET
SUBJECT: Position on Cryptonyms, Country Designators, Action
Indicators and Employee True Names
context identifies a source or a relationship with a
specific liaison service.
True Names of Staff Employees In most instances we
will release names of employees who have retired in an overt
status and were serving in Headquarters when cited in a
document. We will continue to protect the true names of
employees cited as serving in a field position. References
to field personnel in true name are uncommon, however, since
pseudonyms are normally used in correspondence between
Headquarters and the field.
Fredrickt. Wickham, Jr.
2
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
8 November 1995
MEMORANDUM FOR:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Jeremy Gunn,
ARRB Staff
Barry Harrelson,
CIS/CSI/HRG
Issues re Cryptonyms, Country
Designators, Action Indicators and
Employee True Names (U)
Attached is memorandum from the DO Focal Point for the
ARRB addressing the release of cryptonyms, country
designators, action indicators and employee true names. The
memorandum is intended to provide guidance to you and your
staff and complements information provided in previous
discussions. Ellie and I welcome the opportunity to discuss
these issues with your staff. (U)
Attachment
Unclassified When Separated
From Attachment.
SECRET
13-00000
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW - 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 Fax: (202) 724-0457
December 11, 1995
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
BY FACSIMILE
Mr. John Pereira
Director
Historical Review Group
Center for the Study of Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, DC 20505
Dear John:
As Mary and I discussed with Barry late last Friday, CIA's long-awaited response to
ARRB's request for evidence about the true names to be considered at tomorrow's
Board meeting was disappointing and inadequate. For several months, the Board has
been encouraged by the CIA to expect a comprehensive presentation of specific
evidence relating to its desire to protect the true names of CLA employees. The Board
has delayed action on hundreds of assassination records in anticipation of this evidence
We are frankly concerned not only by the impact the CIA's action will have on our
work, but also by the fact that we feel we have been mislead by the Agency in this
instance.
We urge your full compliance with our request in time for tomorrow's meeting.
Sincerely yours,
David G. Marwell
Executive Director
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunneim, Chair Henry & Graff Kermit L Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. David G Marwell
10
13-00000
SECRET
11 December 1995
NOTE FOR THE FILE
SUBJECT:
Briefing of JFK Board Staff: Cover
1. On 1 December, Barry Gibson, Deputy Chief of the
Office of Central Cover, briefed the Executive Director of
the Assassinations Records Review Board and other Board
staff members. Also participating from CIA were John Goins
and Eleanor Neiman of IMS; Linda Cipriani, OGC; and Barry
Harrelson and I from HRG.
2. The focus of the briefing was on the need to protect
the names of former Agency employees that appeared in the
JFK records. Gibson discussed the risks involved for people
who retired under cover if they were identified in the
public record as former CIA employees. He discussed the
efforts made by his office to obtain written statements from
the more than 100 individuals whose names appear.
3. The purpose of the briefing was to assist the Board
in its review of names when it meets on 12-13 December. The
Agency was asked in particular to present, in writing,
evidence of risk for each of the names that will be
discussed at the Board's meeting.
John F. Pereira
SECRET
CL BY: 01859043
CL FEASON:
DECL ON:
Cor 2-87 15
XI
DRV FROM:
AHB 70-9
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Barry R. Gibson @ DO
Elaine S. Mathias @ DO
Linda C. Cipriani OGC
03/04/96 09:26:53 AM
JFK - Central Cover appeal
The General Counsel and I met with the JFK Review Board on Friday and discussed, among other things, how to deal with the potential
public release of the identities of former employees retired under cover. The Board clearly wants to do the right thing here, but they feel
they are not getting enough information to make that decision.
Jeremy Gunn (JFK Board's General Counsel) will soon provided me with some of the Board's suggestions on how to deal with this which I
will pass on to you (including how to deal with Whitten). I would at the very least like to be able suggest that we attempt contact again
(either through CIA or the Board) with those retirees who have not yet responded to our letter. Of course, any suggestions you have at
this point will be extremely helpful. My sense is that this issue of protecting retirees is something everyone at CIA will want to appeal
just on the principal of it, but that we should do everything possible to avoid an appeal. (Until we work out an agreement with the Board,
you should continue to prepare that appeal you are drafting]
In the meantime, can you please provided me the following figures:
available:,
1. The # of people we sent letters to regarding the potential Board releases. (isn't it 150?) and the following breakdown if
- # living abroad
- # of those retired under cover vs. those whose cover has been rolled back or lifted
- # of those who still work for us in covert/overt capacity
2. The # of responses we received to date.
3. The # of responses to date requesting that we don't release.
4. The # of responses to date saying that they didn't care.
I realize you are all out of the office these days, but I would appreciate getting this as soon as you can. Thanks.
CC:
J. Barry Harrelson
Eleanor E. Neiman @ DO
Frederick Wickham @ DO
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
8 March 1996
MEMORANDUM FOR:
J. Barry Harrelson
John Pereira
FROM:
"Linda C. Cipriani
DCI/OGC/LD
SUBJECT:
JFK - March 18 Board Meeting
REFERENCE:
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
From the Desk of Linda C. Cipriani
NOTE FOR:
Paula A. Sweeney @ DCI
Robert O. Davis @ DCI
Robert D. Caudle @ DCI
FROM:
Linda C. Cipriani
DATE:
03/08/96 02:50:39 PM
SUBJECT:
JFK - March 18 Board Meeting
I have been informed that Dave Edgers will be attending the next JFK Board meeting. If this is the case, it would seem that Jeff should
go as well.
Two issues need to be discussed with the Board: stations and cover employees.
1.
Jeff and the Board agreed in principal to a "window" in which all stations would be opened (1960-64). Of course, if
there are particular stations which need to be exempted from this the Board will consider it upon the presentation of substantive
evidence.
- HRG and the Board think this is a good idea that would enable them to avoid raising potential appeals every month
-Dave Edger needs to be signed onto this idea.
- Jeff, last month, presented additional information on Oslo, Stockholm, and Copenhagen. Jeff and Dave should be
prepared to answer questions or provide more information so that the Board will agree to protect these stations.
2.
The Board recently released the names of 16 cover employees. An appeal is being prepared (or so I am told). The
thirty days runs on March 18. We need to finalize with the Board how to handle this issue. At the last meeting the Board agreed that
this was a really important decision, but that they were not getting the information they need to make the right decision. At the last
meeting, the Board intimated that they might be willing to delay this release, if CIA and the Board could come to a mutually agreeable
way to deal with cover employees. I understood from Jeff that this is an issue that CIA will appeal on just the principal. If this is true,
the Board should understand what our ultimate position is on this, but that we are willing to cooperate with them to find a suitable
alternative (using pseudos or generic descriptions like "case officer")
3.
I will be out all next week but Barry Harellson/HRG (30292) and John Pereira/CSI) (30373) will be happy to fill you
in on the details. Barry will be contacting Bob Caudle next week to find out how the March 18 meeting will be handled.
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
MEMORANDUM
March 20, 1996
To:
Review Board
cc:
David Marwell
CIA Team
From:
T. Jeremy Gunn
Subject:
Board Guidelines on Release of CIA Officer Names
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
i.
The Staff understands the Review Board to accept the following general guidelines on
the release of true names of CIA officers:
When the true name of a CIA officer (i.e. past or present employee of CIA) appears in a
document, the Board will bring to its review a presumption that the true name will be
released. In order to overcome this presumption of release, CIA must provide evidence
demonstrating that release of the name would be harmful. In order to meet its burden
of proving harm, CIA must tailor the evidence to satisfy one of the three categories
identified in Part I (below). However, when the name of an officer is of such
importance that the public interest would not be served in postponing a name, the
Board may release the true name consistent with the principles identified in Part II
(below).
Part I. Categories of Officers.
1. Living officers. For living (present or former) officers, CIA must prove that:
(a) the officer is living outside the United States (or reasonably is expected to
reside or travel outside the United States in the foreseeable future); (b) the officer
is either working or is retired under cover; and (c) the officer objects to the
release of his or her true name. If CIA satisfies this burden, the Board
presumptively (see Part II below) will release a pseudonym and postpone the
officer's true name until the year 2010.
2. Where current status of former officer is unknown. Where CIA has been
unable to contact the former officer because his or her location is unknown, CIA
must present a good faith showing that reasonable attempts have been made to
locate the officer. If the Board is convinced that CIA has made a good faith
showing that it was unable to locate the former officer, the Board will postpone
the true name until June 1, 1997. However, the Board may postpone the true
13-00000
-2-
name beyond June 1, 1997, if CIA provides to the Board, prior to May 1, 1997,
additional evidence that satisfies the criteria of either category 1 (above) or
category 3 (below).
3. Names having effect on current intelligence interests. If CIA believes that
the release of a true name may compromise currently existing intelligence
operations or might otherwise cause an identifiable harm, it must provide
evidence that: (a) the officer currently is engaged in clandestine activities; (b) the
release of the true name would compromise ongoing intelligence operations or
would compromise operations with current intelligence value; (c) the release of
the true name would reasonably be expected to cause significant harm to a living
person (including family members), or (d) the release of the true name would
cause a significant harm to the national security or the foreign relations of the
United States. If CIA satisfies this burden, the Board presumptively (see Part II
below) will release a pseudonym and postpone the true name until 2010 or until
such other date as CIA reasonably shows to be a date on which the release could
be made without causing harm.
Part II. Names of Officers Who Are Important to the Assassination Story.
The Board presumptively will postpone the release of names consistent with
categories 1-3 of Part I. However, for certain persons whose names appear in a
context that is important to the assassination story, the Board may nevertheless
vote to release the true name. In all such instances, the Board will notify CIA of
the importance of such a person and provide CIA with the opportunity to
provide additional information in support of postponing the release of the
names. These names shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis, with due
consideration being given to the importance of the person to the assassination
story and such evidence of harm as CIA may provide.
1
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
29 July 1996
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief Historical Review Group
FROM:
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
DO, Focal Point for ARRB
SUBJECT:
Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
1. Cover mechanisms are an integral part of conducting
clandestine operations. We are concerned about individuals that
continue to be dependent on particular cover legends and on the
organizations that cooperatively work with us to provide those
cover legends. The following proposal is offered to streamline
the process of handling names and minimize the potential damage
an inappropriate release could cause.
A. Incomplete and Unidentifiable names:
a. We will release the occurrence of a name when a
common last name appears by itself or in conjunction
with a common first name such that it does not tend
to specifically identify the individual.
b. We will release the occurrence of a name if it
remains unidentified after a reasonable search is
conducted.
B.
overtly:
Identifiable names for employees that retired
In most cases, overt employees' names will be released,
but in some cases overt employees may have a
portion of their employment remain under cover.
cases will require the same review as that of an
employee who remained under cover into retirement.
Such
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
C. Identifiable names for employees that retired
covertly:
2.
a. We will make a reasonable attempt to locate a
current address and contact the person. If the person
objects to the release of his or her name for reasons
associated with current life style issues, we will
object to the release of the name. If the person does
not have objections based upon personal circumstances we
will review the name for organizational issues (See
para C. c.)
i
b. If reasonable efforts fail to locate the
current address, but it can be determined that the
individual is still receiving a pension, insurance or
other benefit based upon cover legend, we will need to
continue to protect the name since source of income or
benefits can not be altered without prior notification
to the individual. If we fail to identify a pension or
other active benefit, we will review the name for
organizational issues. (See para C. c.)
c. We will make a reasonable attempt to review the
name to look for identifiable harm to the person's
safety, family, ongoing operational activities, national
security or foreign relations. Assuming that none of
the previous concerns are identified, we will review the
potential damage to the cover mechanism or cover
provider by the specific occurrence of the name if
released.
Because families of deceased employees could be the
beneficiary of pensions or insurance provided under the employees
cover legend, we must review them the same as we would the
employee. We also have second and third generation officers
following in the footsteps of their parents that could be
negatively impacted by the revelation.
3. Our efforts to locate current addresses will include all
internal record systems maintained by Office of Personnel
Security, Retirement Branch and Insurance Branch. We will
include a checklist reflecting completion of these searches
2
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
within the documentation when requesting continued protection of
the name.
4.
We considered options of contacting IRS or OPM during
our attempts to locate current addressing information, but based
upon the fact that these offices would be unwitting of the cover
arrangement for the individual, it was determined to be an
unreasonable risk to the cover of these officers.
Fredrick C. Wickham, Jr.
3
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
13-00000
ADMINISTRATIVE - INTERNAL USE ONLY
SUBJECT: Proposal for Dealing with Employees' Names
IMS/RPG Fwickham:mjk (29 July 1996)
Distribution:
Orig & 1- Addressee
1 C/OCC
1
IMS/ESG/ALB
1
IMS/ESG/IRB
1
IMS/ESG/HCS
1
IMS/ESG-OIT/MSG/RDP
1
ESG Chrono
4
LANTERANAL LISE ONLY
13-00000
SECRET - WORKING PAPER
5 March, 1997
Memorandum For: Chief/HRG
From:
Subject:
Reference:
Barry Harrelson
Name Issue / Status of Review
Meetings with ARRB staff (Marwell & Gunn)
4 March 1997
wak f6
Name Issue
I met with Gunn and Marwell (separate meetings) to
discuss the reopening of the names issue per my memo to you.
Both Gunn and Marwell reacted positively. They found the
proposal to be reasonable one and they are willing to work
with us in approaching the Board. However, both said they
could not predict the Boards reaction. Per Marwell, one
member of the Board (Anna Nelson) seems to believe that if a
person worked for the CIA it should be known.
Apparently our timing is excellent. Marwell is
planning to propose to the Board that they change the
process from the focus on individual postponements to
documents. Under the new approach his staff would have the
authority to negotiate with the Agency on the release of
documents, and only issues/documents of disagreement would
be placed before the Board. Marwell is convinced that even
with an additional year they will not finish the project
with the current approach. He sees our proposal on the
names as an example of how the process would work.
Marwell recommends that we include examples of
documents containing names of little or no connection to the
story. Bob Skwirot (he was in the meeting with Marwell)
said that there were a number of names that appeared in only
one document and that the number of names had reached (590
Marwell wants to start immediately on preparing a joint list
of important/releasable individuals.
Action: Advise DO, OGC, upper management of our proposal to
reopen the name issue (how?). Need to decide what level
would sign the memo to the Board, and who would prepare the
memo. If you agree I can send a copy of my memo to you to
Linda and Fred for background use.
HRG and DO team will collect examples of documents and
prepare (with ARRB staff) a list of individuals. The DO
should focus on any person on the list that needs protection
and prepare the evidence ASAP (i.e. not wait for the issue
to be resolved).
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET - WORKING PAPER
New ARRB Review Process
Marwell and I spent some time discussing how a new
process would work. He would like to test the process for
the April meeting. The following is a rough outline with my
comments:
1) HRG reviewers would review the documents the same
as they do now (postponements would be blue highlighted).
[no change in our procedures]
2)
document.
ARRB staff would review the blue highlighted
a) If they agree, they would stamp the document
“ARRB approved" and return it to HRG to process
for NARA.
b) If they disagree they would highlight in
yellow (creating green highlighting). If the two
staffs cannot resolve the issue, then the document
would go before the Board.
[Major change: ARRB staff would no longer record all the
proposed postponements, no DO damage review, no detailed
determination letter requiring HRG reviewers to use the
"grid” to determine what happen.]
3) Non-issue documents would be sent to the ARRB
staff when ready for NARA. At that time the ARRB staff
would prepare a simplified final determination notice and
letter to the Agencies.
[ No action would be required; HRG would file the final
determination notice with the document].
4)
"Green" highlighted documents that go to the Board
would be handled the same as today.
[The expectation is that a lot less documents would require
Board action. )
Comments: With some fine tuning, I think this process could
work, and we would be able to complete the re-review of
documents released in 1993 and 1994 by Oct. 1998.
Completing the entire project will depend on how quickly the
"non-related" material and the "addition records" are
reviewed by the ARRB staff.
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET - WORKING PAPER
Pending Issues
As part of the change in process, Marwell wants the
Board to focus on outstanding substantive issues as opposed
to micro managing the review. We discussed the following:
1) Nosenko. ARRB staff needs to review the non-related
material and make a recommendation to the Board. Marwell
leans toward not treating all of Nosenko as assassination
related. Could be a hard sell with some Board members.
Should we request that Nosenko meet with the Board? Marwell
thinks they would react favorably.
2) Personnel Files. Again the first step is to have
his staff confirm that only a part of a file is related and
that those documents are in the released material.
3) (Gibson. FBI file issue; we need to present case to
the Board
4) LI 9. Continuing to protect will be a hard sell
given that (Newman has published identity; we need to present
case to the Board.
5) CRC Financial Files. ARRB staff needs to review
Annual Report and Extension
:
Marwell ask me to draw you attention to the Annual
Report and the request for an extension. He would still
like a letter from the Agency (could be addressed to him)
along these lines: "reviewed Annual Report"
"note that the Board has ask for extension"
"support the request/feel it is in interest of
Agency and public /or something along these lines"
Other issues (not discussed with Marwell/Gunn)
(Linda) (OGC) says CI Staff has ask Gunn to rewrite his
notes, and opposes Gunn's suggestion to release pages from
the CI histories he reviewed. Gunn indicated in his notes
that some of the pages should be released and might be
considered assassination records. We are going to run into
similar problems with the other histories. Gunn will be in
HQ tomorrow to re-do his notes. She will discuss the "pages
issue" with the goal of having him drop the request to
release. As to the question of designating the pages as
assassination records, she will inform him that CI will
oppose. If he insist, she will refer back to HRG.
SECRET
i
13-00000
04/23/97 WED 15:53 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
COVER
SHEET
Το:
J. Barry Harrelson
Fax #:
703-613-3063
Subject:
Segregated Collections
Date:
April 23, 1997
Pages:
7, including this cover sheet.
Today the Board adopted the attached guidelines.
FAX
CIA HAS NO OBJECTIONΝ ΤΟ
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
From the desk of...
T. Jeremy Gunn
General Counsel
Assassination Recorde Review Board
600 E Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20530
(202) 724-0088
Fax: (202) 724-0457
2001
13-00000
04/23/97 WED 15:53 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
Assassination Records Review Board
Guidelines for Review of Postponements in the Segregated Collections
Adopted: April 23, 1997
Background
In order to ensure that the Review Board will be able to complete its task of reviewing
all identified assassination records, the Board recently took two significant steps. First,
on November 13, 1996, it adopted guidelines with respect to reviewing "Segregated
Collections" with regard to information that is "not believed relevant" (NBR) to the
assassination. Second, in February 1997, the Review Board requested Congress to
extend its tenure for one additional year.
It is the Review Board's judgment that, even with the assumption that our operations
may be extended through Fiscal Year 1998, the Review Board cannot hope to complete
review of postponements in the Segregated Collections under the current method of
review. In particular, a reasonable modification of current postponement standards
would greatly expedite and facilitate the release of additional information and records.
Otherwise, the Review Board might cease operations without having reviewed claimed
postponements in tens of thousands of pages of FBI and CIA records.
Postponement Criteria for the Segregated Collections
In a further effort to enhance the Review Board's work, the Review Board now issues
these revised guidelines for the review of records in the Segregated Collections.¹
(These guidelines do not affect the FBI's Core and Related Files or the CIA's 201 file on
Oswald.) The four principal factors that underlie these review guidelines are: first,
continuing, to the greatest reasonable extent, the Review Board's established
guidelines for postponements that have emerged over the past two years; second,
establishing guidelines consistent with the Review Board's decision regarding NBR
records; third, establishing reasonable and workable guidelines that will enable the
The regulations adopted by the Board on November 13, 1996, define
"Segregated Collections" as including first, FBI records that were requested by: (a) the
House Select Committee on Assassinations ("HSCA") in conjunction with its
investigation into the Kennedy assassination; (b) the Church Committee in conjunction
with its inquiry into issues related to the Kennedy assassination; and (c) by other bodies
(e.g., Pike Committee, Abzug Committee, etc.) that relate to the Kennedy
assassination; and second, CIA records including (a) the CIA's Sequestered Collection
of 63 boxes as well as one box of microfilm records and the microfilm records (box 64),
and (b) several boxes of CIA staff "working files."
002
13-00000
04/23/97 WED 15:54 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
-2-
Review Board, the ARRB staff, the CIA, and the FBI to complete the significant amount
of work that remains; and finally, to provide reasonably consistent standards for the
review of postponements that would apply equally to CIA and FBI records.
The following are, in summary form, guidelines for reviewing postponements in the
Segregated Collections.2
CIA Source and FBI Informant and National Security Asset Postponements
There are, of course, similarities and differences between FBI informants and CIA
sources. Like FBI informants and national security assets, CIA sources may or may not
be paid for the information that they provide and they may or may not be providers of
information over the long-term. When providing information to the Bureau, FBI
informants generally are understood to be cooperating with law enforcement officials for
a legal and legitimate purpose. It is often the case, although not always, that FBI
informants understand that at some point their name might surface in conjunction with a
criminal prosecution and that they may need to testify in court. Foreign CIA sources
and FBI national security assets, however, are not necessarily deemed to be
cooperating with law enforcement officials but may, in fact, be committing the crime of
espionage against their native country by cooperating with US authorities. Furthermore,
unlike FBI informants, CIA sources and FBI national security assets presume that their
names will not be released publicly and they certainly presume (in the ordinary course)
that their identities will not surface in criminal trials. As a practical matter, it is generally
much easier today for the FBI to locate a former informant who resides in the United
States than it is for the CIA and FBI to locate former sources and national security
assets.
Despite these differences -- differences which would generally suggest a greater
degree of protection being owed to CIA sources and FBI national security assets -- the
issues in terms of postponements are fundamentally similar.
1
2The existing "NBR" guidelines allow the Review Board to remove from detailed
consideration those records or files that truly have no apparent relevance to the
assassination. Nevertheless, a significant number of files in the Segregated Collections
contain records that shed some light on issues that the HSCA explored as potentially
relevant to the assassination of President Kennedy. The following criteria would apply
to all records in the Segregated Collections, including records containing some NBR
redactions.
003
13-00000
04/23/97 WED 15:54 FAX 202 724 0457
ARRB
-3-
CIA Sources
The Review Board established guidelines, during its December 1996 meeting, for
handling CIA source issues and applied those guidelines at the January 1997 meeting.
These guidelines directed the protection of names and identifying information of CIA
sources in cases where the identity of the source is of low public interest or is peripheral
to the JFK assassination. The Board's decision was based on two factors: the concern
that since CIA sources generally live outside the United States, they could risk harm if
their identities were revealed. Moreover, many of the sources referenced in CIA
records appear infrequently and are of relatively low public interest. Therefore, in
records where the identity of the source is of importance for understanding the
assassination, the CIA will be required to provide additional evidence to support the
protection of the source's identity. In cases where the identify of the source is
peripheral to the assassination story, the information will be postponed until 2017.
FBI National Security Assets
FBI national security assets should be treated in the same manner as CIA sources.
FBI Informants
Informant issues represent the largest category of postponements in the FBI's
Segregated Collection, as they do in the "core" FBI assassination files. They also
provide the greatest opportunity for streamlining the review process. Currently, there
are ten members of the Bureau's JFK Task Force who are responsible for researching
individual informants in response to evidence requests from the Review Board. They
retrieve and review the informants' files and attempt, through DMV, Social Security, and
other database searches, to determine if the informant is alive. Under current Review
Board standards for "core" files, this work is necessary to provide evidence to support
redacting the informant's name, regardless of whether the informant provided
information. Removing the requirement of proving whether informants are alive in the
Segregated Collections would free up significant resources that could be deployed to
reviewing unprocessed HSCA subject files.
The new approach to HSCA subjects is to protect informant-identifying information,
An example would be the case of John Scelso (pseud.). The Board found that
his identity is relevant to the assassination story and CIA offered evidence of a
continuing need to protect the identity. In this case, “Scelso" documents would
continue to be scheduled for release in five years.
'Six work full-time on informant evidence, four devote about half their time to
informant evidence.
004
13-00000
-4-
without requiring the Bureau to make a showing