14-00000
104-10111-10079
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
43872
DAVID CHRIST
14 August 1961
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
The day after her husband's arrival in the United States on 16 Sep 1960, Mrs. Christ
was interviewed by the Agency. Mrs. Christ had very little knowledge of the operations
and her husband's work but did discuss the meetings and surveillance activities.
Mrs. Christ was thoroughly familiar with the operational aspects of the surveillance
activities. She stated that her husband's work was relatively safe
and that there were relatively few contacts of any significance.
Mrs. Christ was contacted by a member of the chief of station's
Operations Branch and that this Branch did request data and other
questions from her concerning her husband's activities. She stated that
she had no knowledge of any clandestine operations. She had no knowledge of
the activities of the Cuban exiles. The information on the Cuban exiles
in Miami was classified information. She stated that her husband's
activities were clandestine and that she had no knowledge of his
contacts with people outside the United States Government. Mrs. Christ
had reported her husband to the CIA upon arrival in the United States.
She had also reported to the CIA that her husband had been a
Department employee and as such was protected by the Cuban
Government. She stated that the Department surveillance had been
successful. Although the name of the agent (Ford) was
not revealed at this time, Mrs. Christ was also told that the operational
intelligence that her husband possessed, if disseminated, would not only cause
double damage to the United States Government, but would also lead to his
torture and probably brutal interrogation by the Cubans and probably the
Castro regime. She was not given any information involving her husband.
Mrs. Christ was given as much information as possible about Mr. Christ's
cover story. He was employed by a cover organization, Wachtel Wachtel Associates,
located in New York City and had been provided documentation, such as a driver's license
and a total security clearance. Mr. Christ understood the reasons for this cover; it was easier for her husband to pass
as a bachelor than to abide the existence of a family. At a time
where the movements or activities of his contacts were unknown, prior to
their arrest, been discussed with Mr. Christ. Mrs. Christ was informed
that in the event of danger the table placed to correspond to an
apartment which was occupied by an un-witting State Department secretary.
Since the initial interview, Mrs. Christ has gradually passed up
additional information. It is believed that Mrs. Christ, short of the
exact facts and figures, mostly in response to inquiries, which she did
not seem too interested in providing at the time of the trial, nor
during the subsequent interviews. At the time of the trial, she was
not very cooperative in the operational aspect of the case, nor the
reasons for her husband's presence. She was probably reluctant to
provide information that might inadvertently expose her husband. She
has been instructed not to seek unnecessary big publicity with her
husband's activities.
Mrs. Christ was informed that after her husband's imprisonment of
she contacted the prison directly and that she was the instrument of
communication for her husband. She also conveyed the sentiments
of her husband to the authorities. She also conveyed prior to
the arrest of her husband through her to her husband's attorney.
She was aware of contacts through Cuba but she had never talked
to the Cuban authorities. In May 1961, Kessler visited Washington, D.C.
She was told that Kessler had hired Dr. Colomer, a Cuban national, to serve
as the technician assistant. In June 1961, Kessler visited Washington, D.C.
It was learned also that Mr. Colomer left Havana with his wife
in June 1961 and has been brought to Washington, D.C. An
other attorney has been hired by Dr. Colomer to represent the technicians
and handle the case. It was not revealed that another Christ attorney
was hired by Dr. Colomer to represent the technicians and handle the case
in the event of his presence. It has been told that Mrs. Christ was
acquainted with the name of her husband's attorney, but she appears to be
unacquainted with the name.
Mrs. Christ has learned from newspaper articles that there are
about 20 American plans of the CIA in Havana and that conditions
at the prisons are extremely poor. She also learned that food is brought
to the technicians by a Cuban national. She was told that a Cuban
national visited the technicians a few days prior to their departure.
That Mr. Christ continually worked in the prison.
Mrs. Christ has been given information provided by the CIA
regarding a certain individual's release. Mrs. Christ was also
only one direct approach. She was told that the Cuban attorney
offered to arrange medical replies for the treatment of the three
technicians and that the offer was never acted upon by the Cubans.
She also knows that we have tried several other unsuccessful operations
but she is unaware of any details of these attempts. Mrs. Christ is
unaware of the operation now in progress, which contemplates utilizing
personnel in Havana. On several occasions she considered a
separate operation, for example, when Castro prepared exchanging tractors for prisoners.
Mrs. Christ could only question as to what action should be taken
to send the technicians in any exchange. She also had been informed as
to how this should be carried out. That is, she would only be told that the
negotiations would be clearly monitored and that there would be no
interference on behalf of her husband, unless the political climate was
such as the influencing of
As to the thorough investigation of her husband, she provided
data concerning the radio transmitting equipment and drinking
water. She also reported that the amount of money which she had
received for her husband's utility was slight, was only several
hundreds of pesos.
Mrs. Christ has been verbally advised of the extent of the damage
we have endangered with the technicians and believes that the Agency has been
unable to visit them. She knows that over 1000 pesos were left by Dr. Colomer
with the Cubans and that this amount is being complained through Havana.
She also knows that the dangers which came to the technicians were not
received by the CIA, and therefore, no further payments were made.
The operational details which have been discussed with Gen. Taylor,
but not with Mrs. Christ are of such a nature that little damage
would be done if they were inadvertently revealed to Mrs. Christ. The
photo prints could not be discussed with her either.
The name of the Washington attorney handling the case,
Details of present or future operations designed to
affect the release of the
