10.00000
104-10331-10158
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
NROC-104-98
12 June 1998
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Chief, Information Review Group, OIM
FROM:
Ronald L. Faucher
Chief, National Resettlement Operations Center
SUBJECT:
(S) Proposed Declassification of Information on
Anatoliy Golitsyn
1. (S) Action Requested: Request that the JFK
Assassination Review Board (ARB) not declassify and release
information officially confirming that Mr. John William Stone was
one of Anatoliy Golitsyn's former resettlement identities.
Additionally, request the ARB not release the alien registration
numbers issued to Mr. Golitsyn and his family members.
2. (S) Background: Mr. Golitsyn, a 71-year-old former
high-level Soviet KGB officer who defected in 1961, entered the
United States (U.S.) under PL-110, and became a naturalized U.S.
citizen in 1976. The Counterintelligence Center (CIC) handled
Mr. Golitsyn from 1961 until 1991 when the National Resettlement
Operations Center (NROC) assumed management of the case. In the
years immediately following his defection, Mr. Golitsyn was
allowed to have direct access to high-level U.S. Government (USG)
officials and a substantial amount of classified material both of
this Agency and other Western intelligence services. Since his
defection, this Agency has attempted to keep Mr. Golitsyn
favorably disposed toward the USG and the Agency to prevent any
possible disclosure of his role with us and other intelligence
services.
3. (S) In early May 1998 DO/IMS advised NROC that the ARB
intends to declassify, and release to the public, information
that Mr. Golitsyn initially used the "pseudonym", Mr. John
William Stone, upon arrival in the U.S. DO/IMS further advised
that Mr. Golitsyn's alien registration number, the previous full
;
こ
ACLO
SECRET
CL BY 649002
REASON 1.5(c)
DECL X1
DRV DEF 2-87
WAVE:2
13-00000
SECRET
SUBJECT: (S) Proposed Declassification of Information on
Anatoliy Golitsyn
"Stone" names and alien registration numbers of his two
dependents would also be declassified. NROC understands that the
rationale for the ARB's release of this information is public
availability of the name "John Stone" in Tom Mangold's book, The
Cold Warrior.
4.
(S) NROC strongly believes that the rationale for
declassifying Mr. Golitsyn's use of "John
inadequate given that:
William Stone," is
--The classified information scheduled for declassification
and release to the public contains the resettlement "pseudonym"
of not only Mr. Golitsyn, but also his two family members who
resettled in the U.S. with him. Those family members' names were
not repeat not exposed in Mangold's book.
--In any case, Mr. Mangold erred in identifying the name,
"John Stone," as a "pseudonym." The name Stone was a
resettlement identity assigned to the Golitsyn family which was
used to establish their new lives. In contrast to pseudonyms
(which have no basis in reality and have no backstopping) and
even operational aliases (which may have minimal backstopping and
could be used for a few operations and then discarded),
resettlement identities are living identities. If the
resettlement identity "Stone" was once publicly affiliated with
the Golitsyn family, the personal history of all three Golitsyn
family members (not just Mr. Golitsyn) would be highly vulnerable
to being researched since, as resettlees build their new lives,
they establish public records. Many of these records are now
readily available and exploitable on the Internet.
--Even if the Golitsyns have changed their resettlement
identities through the years, one important piece of identifying
data has remained constant, i.e. their alien registration
numbers. If these numbers are declassified and made publicly
available, then the Golitsyns' other resettlement identities,
including their current names, can be made known. The release of
the Golitsyns' full names, (note that Mr. Mangold did not expose
Mr. Golitsyn's full name) or alien registration numbers will
compromise their current resettlement identities and places of
residence held throughout all their resettlement identities.
5. (S) Mr. Golitsyn, like other resettlement cases, places
a unique trust in the Agency: That it will protect his identity,
security and not publicly disclose his unique relationship with
2
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
SUBJECT: (S) Proposed Declassification of Information on
Anatoliy Golitsyn
the USG. Mr. Golitsyn, as other resettlees, lives life in fear
of retribution from his former government. Official USG
confirmation of his relationship with the Agency may undermine
his and other's confidence in the Agency's commitment to be
vigilant regarding their security. Mr. Golitsyn is in his senior
years and in poor health. Should he perceive the release of this
information as a lessening of the Agency's security commitment,
it may exasperate his worsening medical condition. Should the
USG action lead to his compromise, we are obliged to expend funds
to resettle him once again! In the case of Mr. Golitsyn, this
means resettling two entire households at high cost.
:
6. (S) Furthermore, the recruitment of sources of high
intelligence value has always been this Agency's top priority.
Public disclosure of this information could do irreparable damage
to our ability to attract individuals who admire the U.S. and
might be disposed to collaboration. Disclosure of cooperation
with the USG would cause any potential source to think twice
before placing his life in the hands of an organization who
cannot protect his information. For those individuals such as
Mr. Golitsyn, who placed their trust in this country in the past,
entered our resettlement program, and are now U.S. citizens, the
release of information with no real relevance to any national
issue, seriously erodes this Agency's credibility and undermines
our Resettlement Program.
AFON
3
SECRET
Ronald L. Faucher
13-00000
SECRET
SUBJECT: (S) Proposed Declassification of Information on
Anatoliy Golitsyn
DO/NROC/OG/SSpringer/kwa:58635 (12 Jun 98)
Distribution:
-
Orig
1
1
1
-
Addressee
C/NROC
NROC CHRON
SUBJECT FILE
4
SECRET
