14-00000
104-10250-10134
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR: Chief, DD/S/PPS
SUBJECT
:
Herman E. Kimsey
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
1. At 1840 Hours, 4 March 1959, while waiting in the lobby
of my residence hotel for a friend, I received a telephone call from a man
who identified himself as & Mr. Davies of the District Sales Office, Braniff
International Airways, Washington, D. C. This man was totally unknown to me
until the phone call. He stated, in substance, that he had noticed my name
on the passenger ger list of Flight #971, 8 March 1959, destination - Lima, Peru.
He then proceeded to ask me if I would do him a small personal favor in the
way of an errand. In answer to my query, he said that he had a friend in the
Pan-American Union offices in Washington who had two (2) small books that he
wanted to get to a South American friend in Lima and would I be kind enough
to take them along for delivery in Lima. I answered that I could see no
reason why I shouldn't perform this small favor and that I would be happy to
do so. Several suggestions were then tossed back and forth regarding the best
way to get the books to me. I told him that I was pretty much my own boss and
usually dropped business in the late afternoon and went to the Y.M.C.A. for
exercise, returning to work in the evenings and as the "Y" was near the Pan-
American Union offices, I could easily stop and pick up the books during office
hours. Davies then said he would talk to the friend again and settle the
arrangement. I asked him the name of his friend and he said it is Javian
Hekarde a member of the Legal & Research Division, Pan-American Union.
2. Mr. Davies then changed the subject, to a degree, and asked
if I would be making this trip often in the future. I told him that my plans
were not firmed up at this time and would be more developed upon my return.
He said that he would be glad to arrange with "Air Line, Officials" in Lima to
have me "speeded" thru customs and/or make any kind of reservations for my
personal convenience. I thanked him for this thought and told him to contact
me at my hotel when he had made final arrangements for picking up the books.
3. At 0900 Hours, 5 March 1959, Will Potocki, SR/CE/P, was
notified of this complication in travel, as he is the person most responsible
for the operation which initiated the original trip. (Joe Doyle, of the same
desk, is also a participant in this job and was made witting at the same time
Their only request is to be informed of developments for purposes of avoiding
any clash of interests.
4. At 1400 Hours, 5 March 1959, I checked the local telephone
directory, but found no name similer to Helarde. Telephone information also
reported no similar name.
5. At 1500 Hours, 5 March 1959, I called Robert Cunningham,
C/OS/SSD, and report this information up to date. He referred me to Gene
Winters, C/DD/S/PPS, , where I repeated the information. My instructions from
SECRET
2
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
03
Mr. Winters consisted of verbal instructions to lead these people as far as
they are willing to go and obtain all information possible from them.
6. At this time, 1510 Hours, 5 March 1959, the list of persons
witting to this information is as follows:
a.
Lon H. Thomas, Questioned Document Analyst
TSS/GARD/A&R
b. Richard J. Kuhn, Questioned Document Analyst
c.
Robert Cunningham, Chief, OS/SSD
TSS/GARD/A&R
d. Gene Winters!) Chief, DD/S/PPS
e. Vary L. Velebir Velebir) Secretary, TSS/GARD
f. Will Potocki, DD/P/SR
g. (Joe Doyle,) DD/P/SR
03
The Questioned Document Analysts of A&R are necessarily witting as these books
may not be made available to me until a "late hour" and will have to be
processed in a short time. A situation calling for several skilled hands.
7. 0800 Hours, 6 March 1959. No further contact made.
Remsey
HERMAN E. KIMSEY
C/TSS/GARD/A&R
Ext. 8793
4/1
SECRET

