14-00000
104-10213-10022
1
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992 10022
INTRODUCTION-
Lee Harvey OSWALD first came to as attention
upon receipt of AIRGRAM no. 1301, dated 31 October 1959, from the
United States Embassy in Moscow, in which it was stated that
OSWALD had appeared at the Embassy on 31 October to renounce his
American citizenship. He stated that he had applied in Moscow
for Soviet citizenship after his arrival in the Soviet Union on
15 October. The first public reference to OSWALD appeared in the
Washington Post of 1 November 1959.
On 2 November 1959, the FBI liaison officer requestedfa...
trace be run on Lee Harvey OSWALD in the central hold-
ings. response on 4 November was negative.
Because of the counterintelligence implications of
OSWALD's action, the Counter Intelligence Staff opened an offi-
cial file on Lee Harvey OSWALD to accommodate biographic infor-
mation developed by the Agency in response to a Department of
State inquiry, dated 25 October 1960, on a list of American de-
fectors in Soviet Bloc countries. OSWALD's name was one of those
appearing on the list. CIA forwarded an interim reply on 3
November 1960; a final reply on 21 November 1960. Until early
October 1965, the contents of the OSWALD file held by CIA consis-
ted entirely of press clippings and reports disseminated by the
Department of State, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the
Department of the Navy.
On October 1965, the CIA Station in Mexico City received,
information from a reliable source to the effect that "an Ameri-
can named Lee OSWALD had contacted the Soviet Embassy in Mexico
City on Tuesday, 1 October 1963. He had spoken in halting Russ
ian to the Soviet Embassy guard, Ivan Ivanovich OBYEDKOV, to
whom he said he had visited the Embassy two days earlier, on
Saturday, 23 September. He asked whether there had been a reply
to a telegram that the Consulm with whom he had spoken, but whose
name he could not recall, had promised to send to Washington.
OBYEDKOV had attempted to establish the identity of the Consul
with whom OSWALD had talked: if it had been a dark person, then--
OBYEDKOV
it had probably been (Valeriy Vladimirovich) KOSTIKOV.
after checking with Soviet consular personnel, assured OSWALD the
telegran had been sent to washington but no answer had been re
ceived."
This informationy
(MEXI-6453 (IN
received in Headquarters on 9 October.
36017), 9 October 1963.1 A file check on 10 October by Agency
personnel in Washington revealed the possibility that the Lee
OSWALD who had spoken with OBYEDKOV, and presumably with KOSTIKOV
and Lee Harvey OSWALD, the defector, were the same person.
On 10.October 1963, CIA Headquarters disseminated by cable
[DIR 74673, 10 October 1963) the report in substantially the form
and detail given above, to government agencies whose jurisdictional
interests had been established by a review of OSWALD'S file: thes
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of State, the De
partment of the Navy, and the Inmigration and Naturalization Ser
vice. A comment was included in the report noting the liklihood
that Lee OSWALD was probably identical with the former marine who-
had defected to the Soviet Union in 1959. (Comment: - For some un-
explained reason, OSWALD's statement that he had been to the Soviet
Embassy two days before on 28 September 1963 had not been included
in the dissemination.)
On the same day, 10 October 1963, CIA Headquarters sent to the
Mexico City Station a-lengthy cable summary (DIR 74830, 10 October
1963] of the background. information held in the Headquarters
file
on OSWALD. The Mexico City Station was instructed to pass the sub
stance of its 9 October report to the local representatives of the
same U.S. Government agencies and departments
information
Washington.
to Agener filos
ico City on 16 October to the Legal Attache
Ambassador
on was passed
well as to the
the Minister, the Counselor for Political Affairs, the
According to Agency files, the Chief of Station addressed
a memorandum on 16 October 1963 to the Ambassador in which it was
stated that "On 1 October 1963, an American male contacted the
Soviet Embassy and identified himself as Lee OSWALD. This office
determined that OSWALD had been at the Soviet Embassy on 23 Septen-
ber 1963 and had talked with Valeriy Vladimirovich KOSTIKOV, ме
ber of the Consular Section, in order to learn if the Soviet Embas
sy had received a reply from Washington concerning his request.
ise have no clarifying information with regard to this request."
Bre Chief of Station commenced that "Our Headquarters has informed
the
us that/OSWALD above is probably identical with Lee Henry (sic)
OSWALD, bern on 18 October 1939 in New Orleans, Louisiana, a former
radar operator in the U. S. Marine Corps who defected to the Soviet
Union in October 1959". The original of this memorandum was for-
warded to the Ambassador, the Minister, the Counselor for Political
Affairs, the Regional Security Officer, with copies to
the Legal Attache, the Naval Attache, and the representative of
the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
On 18 October 1963, FBI Headquarters in Washington received a
cablegram from Legal Attache in Mexico City. This cablegram fur-
nished information from. CIA classified'SECRET
Not to be Further
Disseminated", reporting that Lee OSWALD had contacted Soviet Vice
Consul Valeriy KOSTIKOV of the Soviet Embassy, Mexico City;
Mexico, on September 28, 1963, The Legal Attache indicated that he
was following this matter with CIA and was attempting to establish
OSWALD's entry into Mexico and his current whereabouts [Commissior
Exhibit no. 834, pp. 8-9, Vol. XVII, Hearings before the Presi-
dent's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.1.
By the 25th of October 1963, FBF Headquarters had informed its
field office in New Orleans that "another agency had determined
that Lee OSWALD was in contact with the Soviet Embassy in Hexico
City in the early part of October 1963" The New Orleans field
office forwarded this information to the FBI Field office in Dallas
on 25 October 1963. [Vol. IV, pp. 447 and 459. Hearings before the
President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.].
Between 10 October and 22 November 1963 there were
requests/from recipients of the 10 October dissemination
for further information or follow-up investigation.
On 22 November 1963, after the news of the assassination had
reached Mexico City, the Station initiated a review of of all voice
intercept photographic coverage of both the Soviet and
Cuban Embassies. This review of voice intercept transcripts cor-
ducted by the monitor and other Station personnel turned up other
conversations on 27 and 28 September and
on 1 October 1963 These transcripts were reported to Headquarters
on 23 November 1963. [MEXI-7023 (ΙΝ. 67108), MEXI-7025 (IN 67188),
and MEXI-7033 (IN 67232).1
From this review by the Station it became evident that OSWALD
had also visited the Cuban Consulate in Mexico City and had talked
there with a clerk, a Mexican national, named Silvia DURAN. After
the assassination and the publicity about Lee OSWALD, Silvia DURAN
had told a number of relatives and friends that she had talked to
OSWALD about a Cuban visa. Silvia DURAN and her husband, Horacio
DURAN Navarro, were detained and questioned by the Mexican police
from 23 to 25 November 1963.
After giving some of the details of her own personal back-
ground she was an admitted leftist sympathizer and had formerly
worked for the Mexican-Cuban Institute of Cultural Relations -
via DURAN said that when she first heard of the death of President
Kennedy she had been depressed and thought the assassin must have
been a maniac. When she learned he was associated with the "Fair
Play for Cuba Committee" she did not believe it.
When she learned the name of the assassin was Lee OSWALD
she remembered he was the man who had come to the Consulate about
two months before to get a visa to pass through Cuba on way to
the Soviet Union. She realized that he had said he was married to
a Russian and that he had belonged to the "Fair Play for Cuba"
group. She checked her file on him in the Consular Archives and
from the description of OSWALD, she was sure it was the same man.
OSWALD was denied a Cuban transit visa because he did not yet have
a Soviet visa, and he was told to get the Soviet visa first, but it
was noted that this would require about four months. She had asked
the Cuban Consul himself, Eusebio AZCUE, to talk to OSWALD and they
had an argument when AZCUE urged OSWALD to leave Mexico instead of
waiting there. The Consul had phoned the Soviet Consulate and
talked to the person handling OSWALD'S visa request, who had said
it would take about four months to hear from Moscow about the Soviet
visa The same afternoon, OSWALD had come back again and she had
told him the same thing. She gave OSWALD a slip of paper with her
name and telephone number on it in case he ever got his Soviet visa
He did not call back, she said.
Silvia DURAN was reinterrogated by the Mexican police
from 27 to 29 November but she did not change or add materially to
her story about OSWALD..
It is known that the Cuban Ambassador in Mexico, Joaquin
HERNANDEZ Armas, reported on the detainment and interrogation of
Silvia DURAN by the Mexican authorities. The Cuban Government also
sent the Mexican Government a stiff note of protest, which the Mexi-
can Government rejected.
On 26 November, the day after DURAN's release, Cuban Pre-
sident DORTICOS queried HERNANDEZ about his report. HERNANDEZ con-
firmed that there had been an altercation between OSWALD and Consul
AZCUE. DORTICOS made a persistent but unsuccessful effort to de-
termine from HERNANDEZ whether the Mexican authorities had threate-
ned Silvia DURAN so that she would make a statement that the Con-
sulate "had given money to that American". HERNANDEZ's response
was that nothing of that sort had happened.
[MEXI-7068 (IN
26 November 1963; HΜΜΑ-22545, 29 November 1963)
The CIA follow-up investigation produced the following
confirmed results which have a bearing on Silvia DURAN's account:
a. 27 September. In mid-afternoon, Silvia DURAN infor-
med the Soviet Embassy that a male American citizen had
requested a visa to transit Cuba on his way to the Soviet
Union. She desired to know with whom the American had
spoke at the Soviet Consulate. Also she indicated that
the Cuban Consulate could grant him a visa and arrange
immigration details if the concession of a Soviet visa were
assured.
b. 27 September. Pursuant to her inquiry, Silvia DURAN
received a confirmation from the Soviet Embassy that the
American had been to the USSR installation. He had shown
them a letter from the Soviet Consulate in Washington indi-
cating that he had been long awaiting a visa for himself
and his wife to go to the USSR. No answer had come from
Washington; however, the waiting period was sometimes four
or five months. The American also had a letter attesting.
that he was a member of a pro-Cuban organization but he had
claimed that the Cubans would not give him a visa unless he
had already received a Russian visa.
Although the American was still at the Cuban Consulate
Silvia DURAN repeated that she could not give him a transit
visa unless a Soviet visa was forthcoming, notwithstanding
the American's wish to go to Cuba to wait there for his
Soviet visa. According to DURAN, the American knew no one
in Cuba and she intended to make an appropriate annotation
on the American's card. The Soviet official echoed her
statement that the American was not known.
c. 28 September. Silvia DURAN was again visited at
the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City by the American seeking a
Cuban transit visa. Mrs. DURAN contacted at least two mem-
bers of the Soviet Embassy and facilitated a direct con-
versation between one of the Soviets and the American.
Speaking in poor Russian, the American stated that he al-
ready had been to the Soviet Consulate and had left an ad-
dress. The Soviet official replied that he was aware of
that. The American suggested that he had not known his
address then, and he had gone to the Cuban Embassy to ask
for the address, because they had it. The American then
acceded to the Soviet official's invitation to come by
and give them the address.
d. 1 October. In mid-morning an unidentified individual
speaking broken Russian, contacted the Soviet Military
Attache in Mexico City. He said he had been to the En-
bassy the previous Saturday (28 September) and had talked
with a Consul who had said they would send a telegram to
Washington: had there been a reply? He was referred to
the Consulate for the information.
These additional materials were promptly disseminated in Washington
by the CIA to the White House, the Department of State, and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation [Out Teletype no. 84915, dated
23 November 1963; CSCI-3/778,826, dated 23 November 1963.1
It is believed that the Soviet official with whom OSWALD
dealt in Mexico City was Consular Attache Valeriy Vladimirovich
KOSTIKOV, born on Moscow, 17 March 1933. In his letter of 9 Novem-
ber 1963 to the Soviet Consulate in Washington, OSWALD wrote about:
his "meetings with Comrade KOSTIN (sic) of the Soviet Union in Mexi-
co City, Mexico". There is no official of the Soviet Embassy in
Mexico City with a name resembling "KOSTIN", other than Consul
KOSTIKOV:
KOSTIKOV was the senior officer of five Soviet Consular
representatives who dealt with visas and related matters. There
was firm evidence for the conclusion that KOSTIKOV was a Soviet
State Security (KGB) officer, and the other four Consular officers
were also known or strongly suspected of being Soviet State Security
personnel serving under official cover.
KOSTIKOV was believed to be a member of Department Thir-
teen of the First Chief Directorate of the KGB Department Thir-
teen is responsible for executive action, including sabotage and
assassination. Its headquarters, according to very reliable in-
formation conducts interviews or, as appropriate, file reviews on
every foreign military defector to the USSR to study and to deter-
mine the possibility of utilizing the defector in his country of
origin.
[Comment: OSWALD'S contact with a known KGB officer, particularly
an officer of the 13th Department, was an indication of more
sinister reasons than to obtain travel documents allowing him to
pass through Cuba on his way to the Soviet Union. Therefore, CIA
devoted a great deal of time and effort in trying to make a
determination as to whether OSWALD, as the assassin of President
Kennedy, might have been acting in the capacity of a witting agent
of a foreign power. The extensive review and study of all available
material provides no indication that OSWALD had been acting under
direction of the KGB.
The Agency also examined all available information in an
attempt to determine the exact nature of his contacts with the Cu-
ban Consulate in Mexico City. The Agency was equally unsuccessful
in uncovering any evidence that OSWALD's contacts with personnel
of the Cuban Consulate had any other motive than to obtain a tran-
sit visa for Cuba.
OSWALD'S reasons for traveling to the Soviet Union have
never been satisfactorily determined.)
The evidence indicates that Lee Harvey
OSWALD was in Mexico City from 27 September
1963 through 2 October 1963. On October 10,
1963, Bureau Headquarters was provided with
a copy of a CIA cable which stated that 'Lee
Henry OSWALD' (sic) had been in contact with
the Soviet Embassy in Mexico City on Septem-
ber 28, 1963.
Footnote no. 36: CIA cable from Mexico Station:
to FBI Headquarters 19/19/63, memorandum from
LEGAT, Mexico City to FBI headquarters, 10/13/63.
All the information that the FBI had prior
to November 22, 1963, on OSWALD's activities in
Mexico City came from the CIA. On October 3,
1963, the CIA Mexico Station reported to Head-
quarters that OSWALD had been in contact with t
the Soviet Embassy. On October 10, 1963, CIA
passed this information with some background
material to the Navy, the State Department, and
the FBI. The Mexico Station nade a similar
distribution to FBI and State Department offi-
cials in Mexico. Since OSWALD was an American
citizen, and since FBI was the responsible
agency, disseminating this information ended
CIA's responsibility in this matter.
Errors in above quote from Book V
a. The CIA dissemination of 10 October 1963
[DIR 74673] to the FBI, Navy, and State, made no mention
of OSWALD's contact with the Soviet Embassy on 28 September
1965. Although this information had been reported to Head-
quarters by MEXI 6453 (IN 36017), 9 October 1963, the action
desk neglected to include in its dissemination that in addi-
tion to OSYALD'S telephone call to the Soviet Embassy on
1 October, OSWALD had mentioned that he had visited the
Soviet Embassy on 28 September 1963.
b. On 8 October 1963, not 3 October, the CIA
Mexico Station reported to Headquarters that OSWALD had
been in contact with the Soviet Embassy. The cable was
received in Headquarters on 9 October 1963.
c. The Mexico Station made a similar distri-
bution to FBI and State officials in Mexico on 16 October
1963. This memorandum addressed to the Ambassador with
copies to The Minister, the Counselor for Political Af-
fairs, the Regional Security Officer, the Legal Attache,
the Naval Attache, and the I&NS representative included
the statement that "This office determined that OSWALD had been"
at the Soviet Embassy on 28 September 1963 and had talked with
Valeriy Vladimirovich KOSTIKOV, a member of the Consular Sec-
tion, in order to learn if the Soviet Embassy had received a
reply from Washington concerning his request."
It is also instructive to note
that CIA Director John McCONE telephoned
FBI Director HOOVER on the morning of No-
vember 26, 1963, and after noting that the
President wanted to make sure the CIA was
giving the FBI full support, specifically
offered to make 'CIA's operational resources
in Mexico' available to the Bureau.
"The Committee has seen no evidence that
the FBI asked the CIA to conduct an investi-
gation or gather information on the assasst-
nation case, but middle-level CIA personnel
did routinely provide the Bureau with infor-
mation that came to their attention in the
assassination case."
[Footnote 96, page 39, V]
Coment: Herewith an incomplete list of requests from the FBI
for assistance and information from the CIA. The list speaks
for itself.
26 November 1963
Subject: Richard Thomas GIBSON.
(Paraphrase) During the afternoon of 26
November INANITION/17 passed to the FBI
representative in Bern a report (quoted
in full in the cable) The FBI represen-
tative immediately notified ELMARD (P)
and after discussing the content of the
report it was agreed that ELMARD would
contact INANITION soonest. ELMARD em-
phasized the utmost importance the US
Government attached to follow-up of this
matter. ELMARD received prompt answers
to initial questions and arranged to meet
with INANITION/20, INANITION/6 in company
with the FBI representative in Bern.
[BERN 2492 (IN 68312), 26 November 1963
28 November 1963
Subject: Rumored $5,000 bank deposit
made by OSWALD upon return from Mexico
on 3 October 1963..
The FBI has just levied on us an official
request for full information on source
and origin of rumor about five thousand
dollars bank deposit.
(DIR 85654, 28 November 1963]
28 November 1963
Subject: Interrogation of Gilberto ALVARADO.
The FBI liaison officer (S. PAPICH) offi-
cially advises that the FBI requests CIA
turn ALVARADO over to Mexican authorities
and that CIA request the Mexican authori-
ties to interrogate ALVARADO in detail.
FBI reports that it understands that the
Mexican authorities have a capability of
polygraphing and requests that CIA re-
quest Mexican authorities that he be poly-
graphed.
The FBI expressed a desire to have the re-
sults of the interrogation as soon as possi-
ble and that the Legal Attache be kept advised
of developments.
(DIR 85663, 28 November 1963]
29 November 1963
Subject: Ricardo SANTOS
Mr PAPICH referred me to DIR 85665, 28 November
1963. He referred to the fact that there is a
report that the Third Secretary of the Cuban
Embassy in The Hague, Ricardo SANTOS, has a pro-
CASTRO brother in the United States. He stated
that he would appreciate our checking our files
or taking such other steps as may be indicated
to provide the Bureau with the identity of the
brother said to be in the U. S..
[Memorandum from CI/SIG to Chief, WH/3, 29
November 1963.1
9 December 1963
Subject: Chinese Communist and CASTRO Plot.
At 0900 on 9 December 1963 Mr. PAPICH of the
FBI called and advised that the Bureau had a
communication from their Miami field office
setting forth information which had been re-
ceived in a memorandum from our office in
Miami concerning a report which had been re-
ceived from a Western diplomat alleging that
the assassination of President Kennedy was the
result of a plot prepared and executed jointly
by the Chinese communists and CASTRO through
intermediaries...
Mr. PAPICH stated that the Bureau would like
to evaluate this information if possible
He said the Bureau was very much interested in
identifying the source and it would appreciate
any information we can give on where and how
this diplomat got this information since it
would help the Bureau to evaluate this informa-
tion. He said that the Bureau would find the
identity of the source and possible access
to the source, if in this country, most
helpful.
[Memorandum for the Record, dated 9 December
1963; Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.)
18 December 1963
Subject: Nomenclature of Weapon possibly
owned by Lee Harvey OSWALD.
On 18 December 1965 a representative of your
Bureau requested clarifying information about
certain Soviet nomenclature believed to refer
to a firearm once possessed in the Soviet Union
by Lee OSWALD._
We were asked to determine what kind of weapon
this might be
[CSCI-3/779,225 to the FBI, dated 19 December
1963; Subject: Nomenclature of Weapon possibly
Owned by Lee Harvey OSWALD.1
7 January 1964
Subject: Jack L. RUBY
Mr. Carlos VILLA, Miami, Florida, furnished to
the FBI on December 21, 1963, a letter which
had been forwarded to a friend of his named
Jose Antonio Juan. Mr. Juan had received the
letter from his son living in Cuba.
In the letter the statement was made, it is
known here that RUBINSTEIN was here a little
less than a year ago visiting a Mr. PRANSKI,
owner of a shop dealing in tourist articles,
located on Prado Street between Animas and
Trocadero, opposite the Sevilla Biltmore.".
It is requested that, through available sources
of your Agency, you develop any information
possible relating to the above quoted statement
in an effort to resolve the allegation that
Jack L. RUBY has possibly visited Cuba since
1959 and has connections there.
[FBI Memorandum to the DDP, dated 7 January
1964; Subject: Jack L. RUBY
9 January 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD
Attached is a copy of a memorandum from the
Federal Bureau of Investigation on Lee Harvey
OSWALD dated 31 December 1963 and an enclosure
to the memorandum containing names and addresses
found in OSWALD'S address book and other papers
at the time of his arrest in Dallas, Texas.
It
will be noted that the Bureau has asked us to
determine whether any of the listed names,
addresses or telephone numbers have in the
past been connected with the Soviet intelli-
gence services.
[Memorandum for Chief, OS/SRS, dated 9 January
1963; Subject:. Lee Harvey OSWALD.]
14 January 1964
Our Chief of Station in Mexico dispatched cable (MEXI-
(IN 98273)), advising of a request on the part of the Legal
Attache for the development of information concerning one Daniel
SOLIS' knowledge of ROJAS, whose name appears to be Ylario ROJAS
Villanueva, a 31-year old Mexican citizen residing in Guadalajara
and information concerning the names of Cubans appearing in an
alleged notebook said to be in the possession of SOLIS, and an
alleged official of the American Government said to have been in
contact with OSWALD in Cozumel, named Albert LNU
[Memorandum for the Record, dated 15 January 1964; Subject: Lee
Harvey OSWALD.]
7 February 1964
Subject: Eladio ROJAS Villanueva.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer that the
CIA tell Luis ECHEVARRIA, acting minister of gobernacio, name of
subject and that with ROJAS' agreement plan to give him a polygraph
and promise ECHEVARRIA a brief statement of the results of the test.
The Legal Attache in Mexico City would prefer have the
polygraph given in Mexico City; he could, if CIA strongly prefers
get their headquarters' and subject's agreement to go to Texas.
[MEXI-3117 (IN 15081), 7 February 1964]
12 February 1964
Legal Attache (in Mexico City) requests the following
additional questions be put to Daniel SOLIS:
a. Verify if SOLIS has received two letters
recently from Eladio ROJAS Villanueva aka Eladio
VILLANUEVA regarding notebook.
Ur Edwin O JOHNSON, Consulado Americano, Guada-
lajara, Jalisco.
Letters in possession of VILLANUEVA indi-
cate he was in Cozumel with Daniel SOLIS for
at least three months in 1963. Can SOLIS re-
call dates?
d. Ask SOLIS if VILLANUEVA was in contact with
Cubans or Americans while in Cozumel. Ask him
how VILLANUEVA occupied his time.
[MEXI-8194 (IN 18129), 12 February 1964.]
25 February 1964
Subject: Jack L. RUBY
It would be appreciated if you could promptly
advise of any information available to you to
tend to verify this travel by RUBY
[Memorandum to Mr. Winston H. SCOTT, dated 25 February 1964-
from Clark D. ANDERSON, Legal Attache (Mexico City); Subject
Jack L. RUBY.J
13 April 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD's Access to Classified
Information about the U-2.
Reference is made to your letter, dated 13
April 1964, captioned 'Lee Harvey OSWALD, In-
ternal Security Russia Cuba and to the
attachment which contained statements made
by one Eugene J. HOBBS, HMC, USN. Your letter
requested certain information regarding sub-
ject's Marine assignment at the Naval Air
Station, Atsugi, Japan, in 1957 and 1958."
[Memorandum for Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
dated 13 May 1964, from CIA.]
10 June 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.
"It is believed this allegation that
OSWALD was in Tangier, Morocco, should
be investigated and you are requested to
conduct the necessary inquiries, if pos-
sible, to resolve the allegation inasmuch
as it appears that the President's Commi-
ssion contemplates the issuance of its re-
port in the near future, it is believed
this matter should be handled expeditiously.
[Memorandum to Director, Central Intelligence Agency; Attention:
Deputy Director, Plans, dated 10 June 1964, from Director, FBI
28 July 1964
Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD.
In view of the foregoing factors, it would
be appreciated if you would review material
available to you concerning the activity of
Radio Moscow in an effort to identify the
two-minute broadcast referred to by OSWALD
in the aforementioned documents.
We would also appreciate advice as to the
telephone number in 1959 and the current
telephone number of Radio Moscow and we would
appreciate advise as to whether or not tele-
phone number V 36588 was listed in the 1959
Moscow Telephone Directory.
"It would appear to us that if OSWALD partici-
pated in a radio program for Radio Moscow, this
fact would have been known to the KGB and a re-
ference to such participation would likely have
been contained in OSWALD'S KGB file.
"It would be appreciated if you would question
NOSENKO in light of the foregoing observations.
In this regard, it is suggested that NOSENKO not
be informed of OSWALD's possession of the name,
address, and telephone number of Lev SETYAEV."
[Memorandum for Director, Central Intelligence Agency; Attention:
Deputy Director, Plans; Subject: Lee Harvey OSWALD -- Internal
Security - Russia Cuba; from Director, FBI.
"The (FBI) supervisor also testified
that he never had the opportunity to ques-
tion 'D'". On the morning he arrived in
Mexico City, the CIA turned 'D' over to the
Mexican police and denied the supervisor's
repeated requests to interrogate 'D'. He
learned that the Mexican police had exhaus-
tively interrogated 'D' and that he had re-
canted his allegations."
Footnote states that "However, the FBI Mexico
City Legat later had access to 'D' and interro-
gated him
[V.43]
Comments: According to MEXI-7124, 28 November 1963, ALVARADO
was turned over to the Mexican Ministry of Government at 1630
Washington time; on 28 November 1963. This move was made in
accordance with FBI's request on 28 November 1963 to Headquarters
that the Mexican City Station turn ALVARADO over to Mexican autho-
rities. [DIR 85663, 29 November 1963]
The inference of this quote from Book V is that CIA
used obstructive tactics to prevent the FBI supervisor from having
access to ALVARADO. The authors, however, do mention, in a foot-
note, that the Legal Attache did gain access to ALVARADO, but this
tactic does not remove the unspoken allegation from the main body
of the text that the CIA had been obstructive.
The Mexico City Station files show that the Station
and the Legal Attache worked closely together.
In fact, DIR 85661, 28 November 1963, tells the Station
that Larry KEEMAN from FBI now in Mexico. He was sent especially
to follow up leads on the entire assassination. Headquarters asks
that the Station "cooperate with him fully".
On December 1, 1963, CIA received infor-
mation that a November 22 Cubana airlines
flight from Mexico City to Cuba was delayed
some five hours, from 5:00p.m. to 11:00p.m.
E.S.T., awaiting an unidentified passenger.[63]
This unidentified passenger arrived at the
airport in a twin-engined aircraft at 10:30
p.m. and boarded the Cubana airlines plane
without passing through customs, where he
would have needed to identify himself by dis-
playing a passport. The individual travelled
to Cuba in the cockpit of the Cubana airlines
plane, thus again avoiding identification by
the passengers. [69]
Footnote nos. 68 and 69: Cable from CIA Head-
quarters to Mexico Station, 12/1/63.
[V. 60-61]
Comment: The 1 December 1963 is in error. The hours
cited in the above paragraph are not exact. The footnote refers
to a Headquarters cable dated 1 December 1963 This cable is
also incorrect. The cable in question. DIR-86054, is dated
30 November 1963. It reads as follows
"Hqs has received report that on day of
President Kennedy's assassination (22 Nov):
Cubana aircraft delayed its departure Mexico
City five hours from 1700 to 2200 awaiting
important passenger who arrived Mexico City
Airport in private twin-motor aircraft at
2130 hours Mexi time. Passenger transferred
directly to Cubana plane without going through
customs or immigration. Travelled in pilots
cabin to Havana."
Headquarters went on to say that the information came from a
MULCER diplomat who had been a passenger on the same plane to
Havana. Headquarters asked the Station to attempt an identifica-
tion and to determine the reason for such unusual actions at the
airport.
The Headquarters cable is included in the OSWALD official file;
and a copy is also in the Mexico City Station files. There is no
indication anywhere that anything was done in response to Head-
quarters' requirements.
On December 3, CIA Headquarters first
received information from the Mexico Station
on a Cuban-American. According to Passport
