14-00000
104-10183-10042
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
4 June 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: AMWHIP/1 Meeting, New York City, 31 May 1963
1. Meeting Time/Place: Subject was contacted by telephone
on 27 May 1963 and a meeting arranged for 31 May in New York
City. Upon arrival in New York City, the undersigned called
AMWHIP at his office and a meeting was set up for 1400 at the
Forum restaurant. DiscoveMD Mitou...tcord, rounded to
defeceriler Centr.
Livis XIV, Sanch
2. Purpose of Meeting: The meeting was scheduled prior to
A/1's trip to Rome and the Continent for the purpose of arranging
contact with the Rome Station for the purpose of exploring the
possible operational utilization of A/l's jewelry store which he
was opening in the new Cavalieri-Hilton Hotel in Rome, and for
discussing additional means for recontacting the reluctant
AMLASH/1 in Havana.
3. Operational Interest: As in the past, A/1 was most
generous and cooperative in his attitude towards collaboration
with KUBARK. He offered to make available both the facilities
of his new jewelry store in Rome and of the jewelry firm of
Corletto, Inc., of Milan, for any reasonable use to which XUBARK
might wish to employ them, 1. e., as letter drops, cover addresses,
or to provide cover for a KUBARK agent operating in Italy or
Europe. A/l recommended that the jewelry store be considered
before Corletto, however, because he has more control over the
store than the manufacturing firm. (It is noted that we adhered
to this advice in cabling Rome of A/l's impending arrival.....see
DIR
). A/l also stated that his partner in the store is
JURN VENTURA Valner (Walner), born 10 April 1914 at San Jose,
Costa Rica, and now a naturalized Cuban citizen, residing in
Geneva (45) Avenue Wendt, tel. 345732). Ventura, who was formerly
a source of the Air Force Attache in Havana prior to Jan 1961,
is highly recommended by A/1 as a man of discretion and intelli-
gence, who is anti-Regime and is still very interested indoing
what he can outside the island to aid the USG against Castro.
Ventura, who is a jeweler and gen dealer by profession, will be
SECRET
....
14-00000
SECRET
2
in Rome three weeks of every month to manage the store until
a satisfactory, resident manager can be found to take over.
Should Rome wish to take advantage of A/l's offer, he could
be readily used to provide an introduction to Ventura. Only
a general discussion of the ops possibilities for A/l's store
were discussed with him at the meeting. He was told that if
Rone was interested in discussing the idea further with him, a
representative would initiate the contact. This person will
speak English initially and will identify himself as a "friend
of Bill Thompson's" and refer to this instant meeting in New
York on 31 May. A/1 can be reached at the following places,
in order of preference:
c/o Cavalieri-Hilton Jewelry Shop
via Michelino Tossi
Rome
c/o Dr. A. Romano
via Ciccerone 44
Rome
c/o Corletto, SRL
Milan
4. A/1 advised the writer that he would be stopping off
in Paris during this trip in order to get his passport renewed
His contact there is (Luis E. 05
at the Cuban Consulate in Paris.
TRASANCOS A/1 has stated previously (namely at the 28 March
63 meeting) that he feels (Tis a good man, probably willing to
assist the USG, but entirely too outspoken about his dislikes
for certain aspects of the present Regime. A/1 asked whether
we wanted him to sound out (C) and stated that in any case he
was going to tell the man to watch his tongue in his dealings
with the others in the Embassy. Since is already of interest
to the Paris Station, A/I was told that we had no interest in
the man at this time, but that we would be interested in hearing
any comments about the meeting when 11 returned.
also that A/l said that it was through (TRASANCOS) that he was
It is noted
procuring a watch for Jose VENEGAS, Cuban representative to the
IUS in Prague.
5. All reported that he had received two postcards from
VENEGAS in Europe, and as a result, A/I wondered just what
It is recalled that AMLAS!i had
VENEGAS was interested in.
warned A/1 last summer to be very careful of VENEGAS, as he was
SECRET
14-00000
Pu
SECRET
3
!
:
a strong regime supporter and Communist, who definitely was
not to be trusted with the time of day. A/1 will report on
any info he develops on VENEGAS and his activities. A/1 also
stated that he feels VENEGA'S has extraordinary influence with
the regime, and apparently travels throughout Europe far too
much not to be involved in some "special" business for the
Regime.
6. A/1 reported that Wilfredo VENTURA Medico y Su...,
born ca 1933 is a close friend of Fauvre CHOMON, brother of
the diplomat and presently Minister of Communications in Havana.
VENTURA is approachable, according to A/1, if done by a com-
petent and secure person. Ile could be used to elicit info
from his friend CHOMON. VENTURA's wife is presently residing
in Miami. A/1 volunteered the use of his name in any contact,
laces If this was deemed advisable by us.
067. Another friend who is trusted explicitly by All is
Jose ACEF Yara, ca 33 years old, who is in the municipal
government of Havana, his exact position is at present unknown
to A/1. He is of moorish descent. A/1 checking.
06
8. Marcelino (Marzo) ARTIME Vega) 38 years old, is at
present employed at Los Hermanos store selling jewelry208 He
was a phys ed instructor in Batista's time po Marzo" has been
used as a cut-out in the past for letters from A/1 to AMLASH/1.
He has not used this channel since the October crisis.
06
06
a Marc SIEGEL, born Paris, France,
9. Marcel SIEGELMAN SIEGELMAN, aka (Marc
on May 2, 1925) or 1926 Present residential address is (Bua
036-5053) According to A/1, he is currently selling steel for
Barata Ribeiro Apt. 702, Copacabana, Copacabana, Rio de Janeiro, tel.
industries for M. Navigacao e Comercio Motonave S.A.96 Ave Rio d
Branco 81, Rio de Janeiro. Prior to leaving Cuba SIEGEL) was
engaged in acupuncture work in Havana. According to A/1, SIEGEL)
should be able to be utilized in Rio as he has wide contact
within the Cuban community in that city. Subject lived for six
years in Cuba prior to going to Brazil. Is divorced and has son
living in Paris. (This lead has already been made available to
the Field for consideration.)
10. AMLASH Re-Contact Attempt: As requested at the 28
March 63 meeting, A/I reported that he had written a letter to
his cousin, Ivan GONZALES enclosing a card for AMLAS!!/1, which
included the thought that L's girl friend, Maria Dolores, in
Madrid (the accommodation address) assigned L before he returned
SECRET
6.7
14-00000
Vpv
SECRET
4
:
In
to Cuba last September) was very anxious to hear from him. At
this writing, A/1 stated that he had not heard from his cousin
as to whether he had been able to get this card to LASH.
order to increase the chance that a message would reach LASH,
A/1 was instructed to write from Europe during his present trip
there, directly to LASH's mother in Havana, and enclose a letter
to LASH. This message was to include the fact (in appropriate
cover terms) that Maria Dolores was still inquiring about LASH
and really desired to hear from him. Also A/1 was to inquire
whether LASH intended to visit outside Cuba in the foreseeable
future, and if so, perhaps he and A/1 could get together. Letter
to LASH's mother is to be mailed soonest from Europe. Will
report upon return to New York.
11. A/1's address in Paris will be that of the same hotel
he used during the operation with AMLASH last August, Hotel
Franklin, 19 Rue Buffault, Paris, He is well known there and
uses it whenever he is in Paris.
12. The meeting lasted one hour and twenty minutes. There
were no incidents of a security nature.
SECRET
0
WILLIAM E. WAINWRIGHT
SAS/EOB
14-00000
GIOIELLERIA ROMANA
CAVALIERI HILTON ROMA
TEL. 344556
Virtus Copedina
S

