104-10119-10099 ΓED 2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Memorandum
TO: Chief, Personnel Security Division, OS
THROUGH: Chief, Employee Activity Branch/PSD/OS
FROM : H. R. Dugan/EAB
14 November 1962
DATE:
SUBJECT: HUNT, Everette Howard (#23500) - Wife's Possible Employment
by (Spanish) Embassy.
REF: Memorandum dated 11/7/62 from Subject.
1. Subject, Chief, R&P/DODS/DD/P, who has (Army) cover, indicates
that his wife, Mrs. Dorothy L. Hunt (#35576), has been employed by
Communications Consultants International (OS-NR) which firm does public
relations work for the (Spanish Embassy). The firm's contract is to be
cancelled soon and acquaintances at the (Spanish Embassy) have suggested
to Mrs. Hunt that she help them on a part-time basis "doing translations,
statistical research and occasional letters for the (Spanish Ambassador)".
Subject indicates also that most of this work would be done at home and
that, with Agency concurrence, his wife had worked for the (Argentine)
Ambassador in Tokyo) during 1955-56. Subject requests Security approval
for his wife to accept employment with the (Spanish Embassy). There is no
indication that the request has been coordinated with the Chief, DODS.
2. Mr. (Rowles), Central Cover Group, advised that there were no
cover objections to the proposed action.
3. Memorandum dated 1/24/57 to DC/PSD from Bruce Solie in Subject's
file indicates that the employment of Mrs. Hunt by the (Argentine Embassy)
in Tokyo) had been approved by the Security Officer(in Tokyo). Subject's
file indicates that he has been a continuing security problem because of
a tendency to disregard regulations and established procedures. OS File
#35576 on Subject's wife indicates that she
4. The proposed employment of Subject's wife by the (Spanish Embassy),
unless for operational reasons, appears to be incompatible with Subject's
employment by CIA. In addition, although Mr. Hunt has official cover, his
Agency could be ascertained with resultant embarrassment to the Subject,
the Agency or the nation. Accordingly, it is recommended that Subject's
request be security disapproved.
Салии
H. R. Dugan
11/15/62
Concur in disapproval
SECRET