14-00000
104-10096-10047
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
15 May 1972
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT : Meeting with Hal Hendrix, 11 May 1972
1. Hal Hendrix called my home on 10 May, saying that he was
in Washington and wished to see me, Arrangement & were later made to
meet him in downtown Washington at a street corner at 8:00 am on
11 May. I picked him up as scheduled, and after driving around awhile
we had breakfast at the Marriot Motel in Rosslyn, after which I drove
him to the airport so he could catch the 10:30a.m. plane to New York.
2. Hendrix had a nuraber of points to convey, but none of them
were of such importance for him to have made a trip to Washington
just to see me. Therefore, his explanation seems plausible that he was
in Washington basically to see Jerry Hannifin of the Time/Life bureau
to discuss a lead on who might have leaked ITT documents to Jack Anderso
Hendrix explained that he was recently told by a "Caribbean ruffian"
named Fou Goodfriend that the person who furnished the ITI documents
to Jack Anderson was Irving Davidson, an old friend of Anderson who some
years ago had once set aside a desk in his office for Anderson to use on
occasion. Goodfriend said that the picture of Dita Beard with a number
of her Washington contacts published early in the ITT scandal days had
included Davidson somewhere in the group. Davidson is described as a
lobbyist for one or more Latin American Governments as well as for
Israel. Hannifin is considered a very knowledgeable and trusted friend
by Hendrix who wanted Hannifin's opinion whether Davidson might in
fact be a source of Anderson's, Hannifin's initial impression was
that this was a remote possibility, but he said he would check around and
try and talk to Davidson himself to see whether he could get a rise on
the question of ITT. Hendrix said he came away from the meeting wit
Hannifin pretty well convinced that the lead to Davidson as the source on
ITT documents was probably not a good one.
4
-2-
3. Hendrix commented to me that the general feeling in N.Y.
is that there may be two penetrations in the Washington office, two in
the N.Y. office, and one in their Cleveland office. He did not claborate.
4. Hendrix made the following comments about the ITT/Chile
documents:
A. He was aware that Raymond Brittenham, whom he
described as a senior Vice President and a hit of a fuddy-duddy
who enjoys Harold Geneen's confidence, had first seen John McCone
and then come to. Washington recently to talk with Agency representa
about the ITT/Chile documents. One proposal that Brittenham had
thought of discussing with the Agency was that several sensitive
documents be turned over to the Agency for safekceping. He did
not seem to know whether this had actually been discussed by
Brittenhem with the Agency. Hendrix said that Drittenham had
discussed with the Agency what I'IT might say in the Senate
bearings, what the Agency might say, etc. (L. did not acknowledge
having known that Erittenham met with Agency representatives,
saying that this was presumably a 7th floor matter. He might not
have believed me, but I thought it better not to confirm the fact
to him that a contact had in fact taken place since he apparently
did not talk to Brittenham himself about this. )
B. Fnu Schafer, the lawyer of the firm in Washington
retained by ITT as counsel for the expected Sonate hearings on
Chilean activities of ITT, has told ITT officials that he thinks
the timing and intensity of the Senate sub-committee interest in
the Chilean activities of ITT will depend on the general political
situation in the U.S., particularly in Viet Nam. Schafer has been
in touch with Pat Holt, the sub-committee aide.
C. None of the ITT documents on Chile have been turned
over yet to the Senate sub-committee. The documents are still
being worked on by ITT. When pressed as to the quantity involved,
Hendrix said the total is about 500 documents.
SECRET
-3-
:
D. The three documents Hendrix mentioned to me at our
last mecting as being incriminating from the point of view of
documenting ITT funds of political activities in Chile have not
been destroyed. ITT's chief lawyer in N.Y. has told Hendrix
that while away on a trip recently, at least four young lawyers
in his office read these documents. He tried to transfer onc
of the lawyers out of his office, and the man threatened to blow
the whistle on ITT over these documents if transferred. One
of the other four lawyers feels equally strongly about these
documents. As a result, the documents cannot be destroyed.
It is not clear, however, whether ITT plans to turn these three
documents over to the Senate. Evidentally ITT had first hoped
to turn these documents over to the Agency for safekeeping in
preference to turning them over to the Senate.
E. It has been determined by ITT lawyers that biacking
out proper names in documents before they turn the documents
over to the Senate sub-committee is permissable. The ITT
lawyers are now going over ali 500 documents to do this, concentra
on the names of Chileans. If they finally turn over the three
sensitive documents to the committee, names of persone, banks,
and finding mechanisms will be deleted, but the basic purpose of
ITT funding Alessandri cannot be hidden.
F. In discussing these three documents, Hendrix said
that the man in N.Y. to whom ITT was to have paid the money for
Alessandri was (inu) Orchard, a Chilean employed by UN Secretaris
(rather than a member of the Chilean diission to the UN). The comp
through which the payments were to be made was the Lone Star
Shipping Company. (This agrees with information in the files).
I acked whether the Swiss Bank account number for other trans-
actions was also listed there, and Hendrix looked puzzled and said
that no Swiss Bank account was involved. When I pressed and
said ray understanding was that carlier he had told me money for
the Edwards group went through a Swiss account, he merely
said there were no references to that in these three documents.
He then said one of the three documente was unfortunately a
message from Gerrity authorizing that the Alessandri movement be
given "half the sum recommended by Hendrix. "
SECRET
-4-
5. Hendrix spoke by telephone to Eerrellez on 9 or 10 Niay at
which time Berrellez reported on a meeting that day with FUBRIG-2
in Buenos Aires. This was the first time that they had met since their
early April meeting in N. Y. Berrellez told FUBRIG-2 that he had not
been able to make the deposit on the second $100,000 for reasons Hendrix
had explained earlier to me. FUBRIG-2 was concerned by this and asked
that ITT do everything possible to resume these payments since he had
money troubles. (Berrellez remarked, however, that FUERIG-2 seemed
in very good spirts personally, and quite optimistic about the chances
of the opposition in Chile). Hendrix plans to reopen the question of resumin
payments to the Edwards people in Chile when he gets back to N. Y. and
sees Gerrity.
6. The U.S. manager of the ITT telephone manufacturing plant
in Chile slipped up to the States a few days ago and reported that he
thought the government would be moving in on the ITT property very
soon. He had already been authorized by the company to send his
furniture up. ITT is also asking Benjamin Holmes to come up to the
U.S. for a visit. I reinarked that my recollection was that Holmes
was on rather good personal contact with President Salvador Allende,
and Jose Toja, but Hendrix commented that even Holmes was now under
suspicion by the Government of Chile.
7. Hendrix heard yesterday from Bob Deach (phonetic) of the
Scripps Howard office in Washington that Ambassador Edward Korry had
left his position at OPIC and is now the president of a book seller's
association according to a press item which appeared within the last
two weeks. Hendrix was unaware of this and asked whether I knew.
anything about it which I said I did not.
8. He had a rather interesting explanation of the by-play in
Chile on turning the ITT nationalization question over to the Congress to
decide. Eerrellez reports that there has been a delay in Allende's
proposal that Congress handle the ITT nationalization because of
disagreement on how to procced. The fear of some hard-liners was
that the government was not being tough enough on ITT. Allende's intent
apparently is to make a proposal that the Congress would be forced to
reject thereby giving the President a chance to call a plebiscite on the
issue which, being about ITT, he could not possibly lose. An interesting
thought.
SECRET
-5-
9. The daughter of Hendrix is engaged to Lewis ("Lon")
Constantine, who is applying for a job with the Agency. He has passed
certain exams and was to have an interview in Washington on II May
followed by a physical exam shortly afterwards. A hitch has developed
in that he was originally considered for some sort of a job in the photo-
graphic field, but he has been told the job has now been filled by someone
who returned to the job so that instead he is being offered a 2-3 year
contract, probably to go to Laos. He is not sure of the career opportunity
a contract status would give him, and is torn between this situation and
some offer now being made by IRS, He has long wanted a job with the
Agency. (Hendrix claimed that Constantine is not aware that his fiancee
once worked for the Agency and that she has stuck to her cover story as
far as employment goes. Hendriz made a big point of this. ) I said it
would be possible to check what the situation was and to find out what the
Agency's intentions were toward this person, but that I could not affect
in any way the decision of hiring, or under what conditions. Hendrix
was careful at all times not to ask for special treatment, but rather he
expressed a slight degree of concern as to the apparent change in job
effers. I replied that as far as I was aware, any person who was hirod
on a contract basis who proved himself to be of exceptionally high
capability could end up as a career employee with us, but it would depend
on employment ceilings, etc. at the time such a switch was actively
considered. He seemed satisfied with this answer. I said I would check
and let him know if there were any unsual circumstances in this case.
My impression is that Hendrix is not overly fond of this fellow, but
respects him and would not try to interfere on his behalf either way.
Jonathan G. Hanke
C/WH/CA

