14-00000
104-10109-10162
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
(
533022
18 June 1969
MEMORANDUM FOI: Special Agent in Charge
Miami Field Office.
SUBJECT
: Field Office Memorandum of 1 June 1969
Re: Charles GOVEA and Francisco
Wilfredo "Pancho" VARONA (Alonso)
1. I have nov read with care the referenced memorandum
which deals specifically with charges by a former agent Wilfredo
"Pancho" VARONA against his handler known as "Frank" or.
Enrique. As you wil have perceived from reading VARONA's
file by the time you read this memorandum, Mr. VARONA is not
well regarded by our Station and/or the people who have handled
him to date. This constitutes the reason for his termination. I
would also like youo examine the field traces on Mr. Charles
GOVEA, an attachment to this memorandum. These traces
indicate that Mr. GOVEA has had in the past, and possibly still
may have, some contact with Castro intelligence organizations.
We are presently wating for a more complete read-out on Mr.
GOVEA from the New York Office of the FBI. Understandably,
therefore, you can see we look somewhat askance at the GOVEA/
VERONA information. Although we recognize the integrity of
the unwitting intermediary Mr. Winston Guest of Palm Beach,
Florida, we also recognize the implications for "Frank" in Mr.
GOVEA's knowledge of our affairs given his possible Castro
intelligence connection. Axiomatically, we will be interested in
knowing, at some pont in the near future, whether "Frank's"
true identity is known by either VARONA or GOVEA.
2. I have discussed this memorandum in detail with
"Frank". Our views on VARONA's allegations are presented
below, keyed to your basic memorandum.
SECRET
RETURN
Do Not Regro
14-00000
-2-
a.
ie paragraph 4 of your memorandum of
11 June 196
03
Mr. VARONA was recruited sometime
during 1957 by Mr. (William Murray) then assigned to
the Agency's Station in Havana. He was subsequently
handled by Jack Stewart) another Agency Officer
presently suzioned in Kingston, Jamaica. Later, still
in Cuba, he was handled by Mr. Frank Belsito now serving
in Panama and Emilio Rodriguez (deceased) Mr. Rodriguez
turned Mr. JARONA over to "Frank" in November 1960.
In August 1911, Mr. VARONA took asylum in the Brazilian
Embassy in Havana. He was later granted "salvo conducto"
to Rio de Janeiro. In the interim "Frank" was exfiltrated
from Cuba to the U.S. When Mr. VARONA arrived in the
Florida area during March 1962, he was met by his Havana
Case Officer "Frank" who continued to handle him until
August 1962, at which time he was turned over to the Greek
Case Officer he refers to. The Greek Case Officer handled
him for approximately three years. Along about 1965, the
Greek Case Officer turned Mr. VARONA over to Mr. Al
McQuade aki Fred who handled Mr. VARONA until May
1968, at what time he was turned over to "Pepe" intro-
duced by "Frank" who served as an intermediary because
of his previous connection with Mr. VARONA. Pepe's
specific job vas to give Mr. VARONA one last chance to
prove that he could be productive before being terminated.
Pepe, an experienced agent handler's problems with Mr.
VARONA were precisely like those of his predecessors.
He found M. VARONA to be untruthful, bellicose and
generally usatisfactory for any form of continued employ-
ment by WH. Miami. Therefore, after due consideration
of Mr. VALENA's potential to cause trouble because of
his long experience with the Agency, the decision was
taken to terminate him recognizing full well there might
be security
percussions.
14-00000
-3-
In tie light of the foregoing, it is worrisome
to find out that Mr. VARONA is aware that "Frank"
recently received transfer orders from the Organization.
We need more information on this. We suspect that the
origin of this statement is the fact that Mr. VARONA
recently mat "Frank" on the street in Mexico City by
complete hamenstance. During that meeting "Frank"
alluded to the fact that he was no longer working in
Miami (although in fact he was) to confuse Mr. VARONA
as to his trw whereabouts. It should be noted that Mr.
VARONA reers to "Frank" as "Frank" because at one
point during the time that he was being handled by
"Frank", otherwise known as Enrique, he instructed
Mr. VARONA to introduce him to the Vasco de CUNHA
family as "Frank" Stevens, otherwise he had known
"Frank" under the name, Enrique. The basis for Mr.
VARONA saying that he believed "Frank" mishandled
the WOFIRM program in many ways appears to be
vituperation plus frustration. The vituperation being
a basic ingredient in his opportunistic character.
b. Fe paragraph 5 of your memorandum of
11 June 1969.
That "Frank" had certain responsibilities
re Juanita Castro is very true. "Frank" was funda-
mentally responsible for the defection of Juanita Castro
although Mr., VARONA furnished the lead. The "Frank"/
Juanita Castro relationship is now quasi-legendary. He
did not fumbe the very difficult handling of this contro-
versial pers:m. Mr. VARONA would have been in no
position to know the load placed upon "Frank" by the
Agency in trring to gain operational mileage from Miss
Castro. Re the information that "Frank" was in posses-
sion of infornation which could have resulted in the
assassination of Fidel Castro, the following comment
must be mate: This refers to the Plan RAPHAEL which
:
:
STENET
14-00000
- 4
involved Mr. VARONA's brother. "Frank" was not
the Case Offer on this operation, although he had
originally recruited Mr. VARONA's brother in Cuba
prior to his exfiltration. The Case Officer for the
RAPHAEL operation, if one considers that there was
a case officer, would have been Stephen P. Mangello.
Re Mr. VARONA's charge that five of his family went to
jail in Cuba and four of his friends "went to the wall" in
Cuba because of the shortcomings of "Frank," "Frank" has
the following specifically to say in rebuttal:
"VAIONA was continuously admonished from
the time of his arrival in the U.S. in March 1962 to
be discreet concerning his connection as well as his
relatives' connection with the Agency. It was common
knowledge in the exile community that VARONA and
his family vere dedicating their lives to the overthrow
of Castro. No member of VARONA's family was
molested by Castro until the exfiltration of VARONA's
brother in 1964. VARONA's brother left a wife and
two childrer behind and later within a period of three
months initated divorce proceedings. VARONA's
brother and probably his wife, and possibly other
members of the family knew of Plan RAPHAEL. It
would be dificult, if well nigh impossible, to ascertain
who could have been the cause of the arrest of members
of VARONE's family, since besides the family members,
other agens who were also involved in this Plan were
arrested at approximately the same time. Re the four
friends "wio went to the wall," this appears to be sheer
embellishment on the part of Mr. VARONA."
c.
Re paragraph 6 of your memorandum of
11 June 1919:
Re, Mr. VARONA's statement that the Cuban
who holds the highest position for the Agency in Miami
and who works directly for "Frank" is one Joaquin
SANGENL this again is embellishment. Mr. VARONA
has obviously known for some years that Mr. SANGENIS
heads the MOT Organization. This is one of the
WH/Miam Station's several projects.
Vey Sortunately,
14-00000
-5-
Mr. VARON is not informed on other Station
operations, so it is understandable that in his
attempt to being attention to himself that he
would focus in those things he is aware of.
Mr. VARONA's opinion of Mr. SANGENIS and
his handling of money is his own opinion. The
Station's view is that it is lamentable that Mr.
VARONA, over the years, did not show the same
amount of personal dedication to getting the job
done that M. SANGENIS has shown. Again, it
appears to be one more vituperative allegation
which has litle basis, based on information so far
provided by Mr. VARONA.
d. De paragraph 7 of your memorandum of
11 June 1969
TARONA was in fact the messenger sent
by "Frank" the person who was going to conduct
the exfiltraton of "Frank" and several co-workers
in June 1961. He did not, as he suggests, have a
prime or organizing role in this exfiltration which
was, in fact handled by the NORBREGAS family,
long time assets of the Havana Station. Whether he
was actuall involved in the exfiltration of Pedro--
DIAZ (Lanz and Manuel AR TIME is not known. It
is probable that he was somewhere on the periphery
as was true in "Frank's case.
e. le paragraph 8 of your memorandum of
11 June 190
iis true that Mr. VARONA is a good
friend of the Vasco de CUNHA family. He got to
know this family when Vasco LEITAON LEITAO was Ambassador
to Cuba. Tie Ambassador gave am asylum during the
BATISTA period, and this formed the basis of their
friendship. From time to time over the years, the
14-00000
6
Agency founi it useful to use this friendship as a
means of controlling Mr. VARONA when he became
unmanageaine.
f. Fe paragraphs 9 and 10 of your memorandum
of 11 June 1.69:
Ve know that Mr. VARONA has written
at least one article for VIDA LATINA. We have no
information however, to the effect that he is being
at all successful in re-establishing and/or revitalizing
the old "Autentico" Party. Given his unfavorable
reputation ir. the Cuban community, it is unlikely that
he would enpy any success in this endeavor.
g. Fe paragraph 11 of your memorandum of
11 June 1960
I should be noted that Mr. Osorio DAVILA,
presently living in Miami, is the brother of a prominent
Communist in Cuba today and should be viewed in that
light. "Frank's" recollection of the situation involving
servants and the ASPRU home, which he took over with
the servants does not jive with Mr. VARONA's report.
There were wo white and two black servants in the
house. The night of the Bay of Pigs invasion, the Cuban
Internal Service sent agents to the ASPRU home to pick
up "Frank.' One colored and one white servant were at
home at that time and they told the DSE agents that
"Frank" was "a gay blade" and would not be home until
early the ne:: morning. The DSE left the residence
leaving behind a note for "Frank" to report to their
headquarters the following morning. In this context,
it should be noted that "Frank's" cover in Cuba during
the period in question was that of a professional gambler;
a cover whim served him well during most of his service
there.
209 jul (69
14-00000
7-
:
h. Ee paragraph 12 of your memorandum of
11 June 1965:
(2) "Frank" has no knowledge of the material
referred to. A further check will be made to determine
if this information was passed to "Pepe" who wo uld have
made it avaiable to the Station.
(i) This material apparently was passed to
"Pepe" and subsequently analyzed by the Station. DSE
personalities were carded. Mr. VARONA's statement
that "Frank" did not properly utilize the information
again appears to be another vituperative attempt to
strike at "Fank" who he apparently blames for his
downfall with the Agency.
(c), (d), (e), (f). No Comment.
(x), (h), (i), (j). This is probably completely
fabricated material. Nevertheless because of its rather
sensational mature, the Station would be interested in
receiving true copies of this material so that it can be
analyzed in me light of specific, positive collection,
evidentiary material at hand. It would also be appreci-
ated if your office could glean the source or sources of
this alleged sensational material.
Re: (k), (1), (m).
(t) No comment.
(Henri VIXAMAR is a Haitian exile living
most of his me in Canada. There is no information
that Mr. VILAMAR is a Communist..
() As in (g), (h), (i), (j) above, the Station
would like to know the source of the alleged photograph
which Mr. VARONA refers to. This again appears to
be sheer fabrication.
:
14-00000
8-
(1) No comment. Nicolas GUILLEN is
a well-know- Mexican Communist poet.
2. If you read the foregoing analysis in the light of Mr.
VARONA's file, I believe you will clearly ascertain that we
put little, if any, confidence in any statements made by Mr.
VARONA. We are deeply troubled, however, by the fact that
Mr. VARONA has used one Mr. Charles GOVEA as his means
of getting to the eminent American citizen Mr. Winston Guest,
who in turn used his good offices to establish contact with you.
We consider it highly important to determine whether Mr. GOVEA
has any current comection with Cuban intelligence and to that
end, we have urgenûy requested from the Bureau any and all
current information bearing on the matter. Although Mr.
VARONA cannot provide Cuban intelligence through Mr. GOVEA
anything really current, he could albeit unwittingly provide a
tremendous amount of information dealing with Agency modus
operandi which we would not like them to have. This becomes
quite important in view of the fact that we have several indications
of aggressive DGI/IN operations to gain information on the AMOT
as well as our AMCRAFT operations.
3. Your paragraph 15 clearly reveals the fact that
VARONA has an axe to grind and he has chosen this way of
reingratiating himself with the Agency by passing information
on "Frank" the man who handled him for the longest period of
time. For tactical political reasons you may deem it wise to
"receive his report under no circumstances, however, would
we want this to be used as a bridge to become involved in again
with a man in whose integrity or objectivity we have no confidence
whatsoever. To reerate re the previous paragraph, we are most
concerned about GOTEA and if we can develop any current infor-
mation on Mr. GOVIA's contacts with Cuban intelligence, we
believe it will be necessary to get some word to Mr. Guest to
disengage himself from contact with this person.
SECRET
14-00000
-9
4. This menorandum has not been completely researched.
It is suggested, however, that you forward it with your memorandum
of 11 June 1969 to your office so that this matter may be placed in
perspective.
5. I would appreciate notification when you forward your
memorandum to your Headquarters as I would like to furnish a
copy simultaneously along with my analysis of the situation. I
appreciate your promptness in bringing the VARONA/GOVEA
contact to my attention.
Attachment: a/s
Anthony R. PONCHAY
Chief of Station, WH/Miami
:
:
