14-00000
104-10104-10145
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
NOTE:
The following materials relate to preparation of the
psychological assessment of Daniel Ellsberg.
APPROVED FOR HEL CASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIES PROGRAM
14-00000
NOTE:
The first page of this affidavit was missing from
Tab C, Volume I, Documentation Supplied by CIA 1 June 1973.
APPROVED
PLEASE 1853
CIA HISTORICE PEDEW PROGRAM
14-00000
STATE OF VIRGINIA)
)ss.
COUNTY OF FAIRFAX)
AFFIDAVIT
I, MA
being first duly sworn, depose and say:
1. I was born on 2 September 1928, was graduated from Lambuth
College, Jackson, Tennessee, and Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, and have been employed by the Central Intelligence
Agency since November 1958. I have been in the Psychiatric Staff of
the Office of Medical Services of the Agency since that time.
2. In the summer of 1971 the Medical Office was approached by
the Director of Security concerning the preparation of a psychiatric
study on Daniel Ellsberg, who had been accused of leaking the Pentagon
papers. To the best of my recollection, it was my understanding from
the Director of Medical Services that the DCI was knowledgeable and had
approved the Director of Security's visit and the request that was being
:
made of the Medical Office. There was general reservation and concern
expressed about such an effort involving as it did potentially
controversial and highly speculative efforts. It was felt that such
activity, involving as this did an American citizen, might be outside of
the Agency's purview. It was recognized that such efforts, while
desirable in some quarters, could be misunderstood, misinterpreted, and
mistakenly considered to have been derived from the doctor-patient
therapeutic relationship which was in fact far from the case. An initial
effort was prepared by Dr.
AB
under the direction of myself
based upon a review of magazine and newspaper articles containing
biographical data about Ellsberg, as well as some FBI documents consisting
of interview reports by informants about Ellsberg.
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
3. On 12 August 1971, on instructions from the Director of
Medical Services, the writer met with Mr. David Young, Room 16, Executive
Office Building, to discuss the matter of a psychiatric write-up on the
:
case of Daniel Ellsberg. lir. Young, at the time the appointment was made,
had stated that there was more information which he wished to discuss.
The meeting lasted for approximately an hour and Mr. Young was joined by
a Mr. Linney (probably Liddy), who seemed to be an assistent. Mr. Young
stated that the Ellsberg study had the highest priority and had been
requested by Mr. Ehrlichman and Dr. Kissinger. Mr. Young also stated that
the President had been informed of this study. He stated that it was a
multi-faceted approach and the psychiatric report would be only one facet.
He stated that he understood that the Agency was uneasy about undertaking
such a study and assured me that there had been no delineation as to how
information derived from the study would be utilized, and if there were
any utilization that great care would be given to make it nonattributable
to the Agency. Mr. Young was interested in knowing what kind of data
would be needed in order to provide further study of the sort done
"on Fidel Castro." Later on Mr. Howard Hunt joined the group. Mr. Hunt
recognized me, being a former Agency employee, and we greeted cordially.
Mr. Hunt amplified on Mr. Young's comments and stated it was his wish to
"try Dr. Ellsberg in public." Other comments were made by Mr. Hunt or
"Mr. Linney" to the effect that the aim would be to render Dr. Ellsberg
ineffective or to make him the object of pity as a broken man. Mr. Hunt
stated that he wished to see data of the sort that "psychiatrists found out
about Barry Goldwater in 1964," and he expressed interest in being able
to refer in a knowledgeable way to Dr. Ellsberg's oedipal conflicts or
castration fears and other similar points.
4. It seemed from Mr. Young and "Mr. Linney" that there was
considerable concern that Dr. Ellsberg had a great deal more sensitive
information which it was feared he would from time to time periodically
expose. "Mr. Linney" stated that Dr. Ellsberg thought of himself as
"having the white hat and the President as having the black hat."
2
14-00000
5. A discussion was held with the group concerning the dangers of
7
preparing such a study in isolation and without the opportunity for the
free give and take discussions among experts, as had been the case in our
other studies. I was informed that more biographic material was available.
I was requested to give examples of the kind of information needed. I
pointed out that insofer as possible, "although possibly not available,
data from early life from nurses or close relatives would be useful. I
agreed with "Mr. Linney" that school progress, including testing, would be
helpful. In the same way, year books, his years in college and in the
military, comments from friends would be helpful. Mr. Hunt also stated
that it would be useful for Dr. Ellsberg's first wife to be interviewed
and he felt, "You can easily arrange that under an operational alias."
It was pointed out that the first Mrs. Ellsberg would be cooperative.
1
6. Information was also offered by Mr. Hunt or "Mr. Linney" to
the effect that Dr. Ellsberg had been in analysis although times or
location were not known for certain. "Mr. Linney" pointed out that after
Dr. Ellsberg gave the Pentagon papers away, he telephoned his analyst
stating, "Now I am free."
7. "Mr. Linney" and Mr. Young, with Mr. Hunt's assent, pointed
out that the Ellsberg study was of the highest priority, even over the
SALT negotiations. It was agreed that the further biographic information
regarding Dr. Ellsberg would be sent to us and Mr. Hunt agreed to manage
this. Mr. Hunt would also make arrangements whereby periodic conferences
would be held as necessary. Mr. Hunt did, however, offer that he did not
wish to come out to the Agency if he could avoid it.
:
8. At this point Mr. Hunt made some comments in the presence of
the group based on his previous acquaintanceship with me and he remained
behind and made some further comments expressing a desire that his
presence and participation in the meeting not be mentioned at the Agency.
After arriving back at the Agency I informed Mr. Hunt by telephone that
it was not feasible for me to avoid reporting Mr. Hunt's presence at the
meeting. fr. Hunt expressed great regret that this was necessary,
stating that he had adequate contact with General Cushman and was on good
3
14-00000
terms with the Director. He was reluctant in agreeing to my statement
that it was necessary to inform the Director of Medical Services.
:
Mr. Hunt wished to know if this could be treated as confidential medical
information, but could not tell the writer in what way. I discussed the
entire situation--the dangers and the reservations and the gravity of
the situation with the Deputy Chief, Psychiatric Staff, the Director
and Deputy Director of Medical Services.
9. On 13 August 1971, additional information was received from
the White House. To the best of my knowledge this was from Howard Hunt
and consisted of poorly Xeroxed classified FBI reports and Department of
State documents. This material provided additional data and on
:
:
20 August 1971 the Director of Medical Services and the writer met with
the Deputy Director for Support concerning the White House request in
the Ellsberg case and the continuing pressure and desire for a psychiatric
study. The problems associated with developing the study and our
continuing reservations were discussed in detail. In view of Mr. Hunt's
enthusiasm, concerns existed about the checks and balances to actions
based on a study if one were to be undertaken. To the best of my recall
the Deputy Director for Support was in agreement with us. While the
additional information furnished further suggested that Ellsberg was
under emotional pressure it was not possible to arrive at any firm
conclusions or comprehensive understanding of the man's personality.
The additional information indicated that:
a. He had revealed quasi-Secret information while
still in the service when he was applying for a
Ph.D. fellowship.
b. He had volunteered for Vietnamese service for the
State Department in 1965 while under the stress of
obtaining a divorce from his first wife.
c.
He had sought psychoanalytic treatment between the
fall of 1968 and 1970 with a psychoanalyst (who was
determined to be professionally qualified and
reputable) in California.
4
:
14-00000
d. He may have been involved in leaking information
about a South Vietnamese in 1970 while he was
actually in psychoanalytic treatment.
:
To the best of my recollection it was agreed that the
implications of the above data would be orally discussed by me with
Mr. Hunt, Mr. Liddy and ir. Young. It was also agreed that there would
be the greatest reluctance to undertake any interview of the former
Mrs. Ellsberg, and it was hoped that after this a written document would
not be necessary.
10. The Deputy Director for Support considered advising the
DCI, but it was decided that I would first visit Mr. Young and inform him
that the additional material basically provided for no further
understanding. It was hoped that this would put an end to the situation,
but if further material was forwarded the matter would have to be dealt
with at that time.
11. The Deputy Director for Support stated that after the meeting
with Mr. Young, the DCI would be brought up to date.
:
12. Following the meeting on Friday, 20 August, and in accord
with the discussions on that date, a call was placed on Monday, 23 August,
to Mr. David Young at the White House. Mr. Young was informed that we
had received the material which had been forwarded and that we had
considered it, and would be available to discuss the data further.
Mr. Young stated that he would have Mr. Hunt call me. He stated that
Mr. Hunt's office was elsewhere in the building and he did not have his
number immediately available. As of 27 August 1971 Mr. Hunt had not
called me.
13. On 30 September 1971, there is a yellow memorandum of a
telephone call to me from David Young at the White House with the
message that Mr. Hunt suggested meeting Wednesday, 27 October, at 11:00 a.m.
On 12 October 1971 I received some more data from Mr. Hunt at the White
House.
5
14-00000
14. On 27 October 1971, I met with Mir. Hunt and with Mr. Liddy
and with lir. Young at the Executive Office Building. The essence of
the observations noted above in the 20 August 1971 discussions were
orally presented. I was told to prepare the material in writing.
On 3 November 1971 Mr. Liddy sent me further information on Ellsberg.
On 1 November 1971 lir. Young at the White House telephoned me requesting
the report the following day and he was informed that the requested
report was at that time in the hands of my supervisors for their
evaluation. On 12 November 1971 the material was delivered by me
to the White House and to Mr. Liddy, Mr. Young and Mr. Hunt. These men
were interested in obtaining information which could be used to defame
or manipulate Ellsberg. While it was never expressed, it was my
impression that the material and information provided were not of
direct interest or usefulness to Hunt, Liddy or Young.
1973.
MA
Subscribed and sworn to before me this 9th day of
may
6
MD.
MF
Hotary Public
My Commission Expirds August 11, 1975
14-00000
NOTE:
:
An unaddressed note from David Young, which transmitted
three FBI memoranda, Subject: "Daniel Ellsberg - Expionage-X",
dated 13 July 1971, 20 July 1971, and 22 July 1971. (These three
memoranda are found at Tab B, Volume II, CIA Materials Furnished
to the Special Counsel, Committee on the Judiciary, House of
Representatives.)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
(
(
Mr. David Young
Room 16
Executive Office Building
The White House
Dave:
Attached is the personality assessment you
requested on Ellsberg. If there are any aspects
of this assessment which, in your opinion requre
amplification, we would be happy to arrange to
make the individual who prepared it available for
discussion.
I know that you appreciate that however this
is used, the Agency should not become involved.
11 August 1971
EB
Director of Security
14-00000
TO
1
2
3
4
5
SENDA WILL CHECK CLASSI
UNCLASSIFIED
TION TOP ANO BOTTOM
CONFIDENTIAL
SECRET
OFFICIAL ROUTING SLIP
NAME AND ADDRESS
Director of Security
4E60 Headquarters
DATE
INITIALS
11AUG
1971
6
ACTION
APPROVAL
COMMENT
CONCURRENCE
DIRECT REPLY
DISPATCH
FILE
INFORMATION
PREPARE REPLY
RECOMMENDATION
RETURN
SIGNATURE
Remarks:
This indirect assessment should be con-
sidered impressionistic and speculative, as the
data on which it is based are quite sparse.
If
more reliable family history and personal data
become available, we should be able to provide
a more solid assessment. If there are aspects
of this assessment which are unclear or require
amplification, we would be glad to discuss them"
with concerned individuals.
MB
FOLD HERE TO RETURN TO SENDER
FROM: NAME, ADDRESS AND PHONE NO.
Director of Medical Services
1D4061 Headquarters
UNCLASSIFIED
CONFIDENTIAL
1-67
FORNO 237
Use previous editions
DATE
110 Auc
SECRET
(40)
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
SEGET
13 August 1971
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting With Mr. David Young
1.
In connection with instructions from the Director of Medical Services,
an appointment was arranged for 12 August 1971 at 2:00 PM with Mr. David Young,
Room 16, Executive Office Building, to discuss further psychiatric input in
the case of Daniel Ellsberg. Mr. Young, on the telephone, stated that there
was more information available which he wished to discuss.
2. The meeting lasted for approximately an hour and Mr. Young was joined
by a Mr. Linney (?), who seemed to be an assistant. Mr. Young stated that the
Ellsberg study had the highest priority and had been requested by Mr. Erlichman
and Dr. Kissinger. Mr. Young also stated that the President had been informed
of this study. He stated that it was a multi-faceted approach and the
psychiatric report would be only one facet. He stated that he understood that
the Agency was uneasy about undertaking such a study and assured the writer
that there had been no deliniation as to how information derived from the
study would be utilized, and if there were any utilization that great care
would be given to make it nonattributable to the Agency. Mr. Young was
interested in knowing what kind of data would be needed in order to provide
further study of the sort done 'on Fidel Castro." Later on Mr. Howard Hunt
joined the group. Mr. Hunt recognized the writer, being a former Agency
employee, and we greeted cordially. Mr. Hunt amplified on Mr. Young's
comments and stated it was his wish to "try Dr. Ellsberg in public." Other
comments were made by Mr. Hunt or Mr. Linney to the effect that the aim would
be to render Dr. Ellsbery ineffective or to make him the object of pity as a
broken man. Mr. Hunt stated that he wished to see data of the sort that.
"psychiatrists found out about Barry Goldwater in 1964," and he expressed
interest in being able to refer in a knowledgeable way to Dr. Ellsberg's
oedipal conflicts or castration fears and other similar points.
3. It seems from Mr. Young and Mr. Linney that there is considerable
concern that Dr. Ellsberg has a great deal more sensitive information which
it is feared he will from time to time periodically expose. Mr. Linney
stated that Dr. Ellsberg thinks of himself as "having the white hat and the
President as having the black hat."
CONST
14-00000
(
Meeting With Mr. David Young
(
4. Some discussion was held with the group about the need to
incorporate joint efforts in studies of this sort. A brief description
was given of the seminar type of approach which our Staff has evolved over
the years, and of our need to peruse the material and to discuss it in an
oral manner back and forth among qualified participants. The group was
agreeable to this and stated that more biographic material was available.
The writer was requested to give examples of the kind of information needed.
The writer pointed out that insofar as possible, "although possibly not
available," data from early life from nurses or close relatives would be
useful. The writer agreed with Mr. Linney that school progress, including
testing, would be helpful. In the same way, year books, his years in college
and in the military, comments from friends would be helpful. Mr. Hunt also
stated that it would be useful for Dr. Ellsberg's first wife to be interviewed
and he felt, "You can easily arrange that under an operational alias."
It was pointed out that the first Mrs. Ellsberg would be cooperative.
5. Information was also offered by Mr. Hunt or Mr. Linney to the effect
that Dr. Ellsberg had been in analysis although times or location were not
known for certain. Mr. Linney pointed out that after Dr. Ellsberg gave the
Pentagon papers away, he telephoned his analyst stating, "Now I am free."
6. Mr. Linney and Mr. Young, with Mr. Hunt's assent, pointed out that
the Ellsberg study was of the highest priority, even over the SALT negotiations.
It was agreed that the further biographic information regarding Dr. Ellsberg
would be sent to us and Mr. Hunt agreed to manage this. Mr. Hunt would also
make arrangements whereby periodic conferences would be held as necessary.
Mr. Hunt did, however, offer that he did not wish to come out to the Agency if
he could avoid it.
7. At this point Mr. Hunt stated to the group that the writer had been
helpful in the medical management of one of his daughters. He informed the writer
that this daughter was now engaged and another daughter would be going to
Wellesley next fall. Mr, Hunt did not wish it known of his presence at the
meeting. He stated that his house was in the process of being painted by the
son of the Director of Security and EB
has been trying all summer.
to find out what I was doing." After arriving back at the Agency, the writer
informed Mr. Hunt by telephone that it was not feasible for him to avoid
reporting Mr. Hunt's presence at the meeting. Mr. Hunt expressed great regret
that this was necessary, stating that he had adequate contact with
General Cushman and was on good terms with the Director. He was reluctant in
agreeing to the writer's statement that it was necessary to inform the
Director of Medical Services. Mr. Hunt wanted to know if this could be
treated as confidential medical information, but could not tell the writer
in what way.
-2-
14-00000
(
Meeting With Mr. David Young
(
8.
The entire situation was subsequently discussed with D/MS,
with DD/MS and with DC/PS.
- ٤٠٠٠
MA
,M.D.
Chief, Psychiatric Staff
14-00000
Baird
Howard Hit.
?/
1456690.
145-6697
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
しー
20 August 1971
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Meeting with DD/S and D/MS Regarding Daniel Ellsberg
1. D/MS and the writer today spoke with the DD/S concerning the
White House request on the Ellsberg case. D/MS made three points
with which the writer is in agreement:
a) The additional information furnished provides further
evidence that Ellsberg was under pressure. Nontheless, the additional
material provided does not allow for any substantive conclusions or
understanding of this man's personality. He sought psychoanalytic
treatment between the fall of 1968 and 1970 with a qualified and
reputable psychoanalyst in California. The allegation that after leaking
the Rand study that he called the analyst and stated, "now I'm free" would
suggest that Ellsberg was still involved in dealing with problems which
either brought him to analysis or which were uncovered in the course of
the treatment. In going to Vietnam for the State Department in 1965 while
involved in obtaining a divorce from his first wife, he had sought to
discharge internal tension by taking action; his analytic treatment was
unsuccessful in altering this propensity. Ellsberg revealed secret
information in the course of applying for a Ph.D. fellowship while still
in the service; he may have been involved in leaking information about a
South Vietnamese in 1970 prior to leaking the Rand study. These actions
may have also been the resultants of internal pressures--the 1970 incident
while he was actually in analysis.
b) There is hesitation about the Psychiatric Staff undertaking
to interview the former Mrs. Ellsberg. It was agreed that there would be
a great professional reluctance at such a procedure.
c) There is considerable concern about the use to which the
requested study would be put. In view of Mr. Hunt's enthusiasm, concerns
exist about the checks and balances to actions based on a study if one
were to be undertaken.
:
Fun RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
:
Meeting with DD/S and D/MS Regarding Daniel Ellsberg 20 August 1971
2. The DD/S considered the advisability of discussing the matter at
this point with the DCI. It was decided that at this point the writer.
would again visit Mr. Young and inform him orally that the additional.
material provided allows for no further understanding other than as noted
above. It was agreed that the writer would not accept any requirements
to undertake to interview the former Mrs. Ellsberg. It is hoped that this
will put an end to the situation, but if further material is forwarded,
the matter will have to be dealt with at that time.
3. The DD/S stated that after the meeting with Mr. Young, the DCI
should be brought up to date.
2
MA
M.D.
Chief, Psychiatric Staff
14-00000
(
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
(
27 August 1971
SUBJECT:
Telephone Conversation with Mr. David Young
:
1
1. Following the meeting last Friday with the DDS on the part of
the Director of Medical Services and the writer, and in accord with
discussions on that date, a call was placed on Monday, 23 August,
to Mr. David Young.
2. Mr. Young was informed that we had received the material which
had been forwarded and that we had considered it, and would be available
to discuss the data further.
3. Mr. Young stated that this would be from Mr. Hunt, and that he
would have Mr. Hunt call the writer. He stated that Mr. Hunt's office was
elsewhere in the building and he did not have his number immediately
available, in reply to the writer's question as to Mr. Hunt's number.
4. To date, Mr. Hunt has not called the writer.
MA
M.D.
Chief, Psychiatric Staff
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
MEMORANDUM
OF CALL
TO:
MA
YOU WERE VISITED BY-
YOU WERE CALLED BY-
OF (Organization)
David Young
"White Hou
☑ PLEASE CALL
WILL CALL AGAIN
RETURNED YOUR CALL
MESSAGE
CODE/EXT
PHONE NO.
456-6697
IS WAITING TO SEE YOU
WISHES AN APPOINTMENT
1)10-18-71 HI? Dinfo Exam
Liddy: cover 2932700 -HUST
456 2282
itm. Hunt suggested
Wed, 27.det."
RECEIVED BY
at 1100
same place.
STANDARD FORN 83
REVISED AUGUST 1967
GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101-11.6
DATE
απο :1969-648-16-8030-1-332-339
TIME
63-108
a
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
TO:
MEMORANDUM
OF CALL
MA
YOU WERE CALLED BY-
OF (Organization)
PLEASE CALL
WILL CALL AGAIN
YOU WERE VISITED BY-
YOU/YERE
Jovit Young
W. House
RETURNED YOUR CALL
MESSAGE
PHONE NO.
CODE/EXT.
456 7627
IS WAITING TO SEE YOU
WISHES AN APPOINTMENT
11-2-
Told him in hals fony
bosms - hegal to Liene Wor this
thaidy.
RECEIVED BY
DATE
TIME
7200 3:50
STANDARD FORM 63
REVISED AUGUST 1967
GPO: 1968 0-318-527
GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101-11.6
63-108
NY POENED FOR MELLAGE 2993
LA PRODIGAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
TO:
MEMORANDUM
OF CALL
MA
YOU WERE CALLED BY-
OF (Organization)
PLEASE CALL
WILL CALL AGAIN
YOU WERE VISITED BY-
YOU/YERE
Loved Uing
RETURNED YOUR CALL
MESSAGE
lem
CODE/EXT..
#SE-6697
IS WAITING TO SEE YOU
WISHES AN APPOINTMENT
(Resson to believe the
material will be forthcoming
Call im meliitt
ak-weancinxious:
7
RECEIVED BY
STANDARD FORM/63
REVISED AUGUST 1967
GSA FPMR (41 CFR) 101-11.6,
DATE
9
GPO: 1968-318-527
:
TIME
10:00
63-108
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
15 November 1971
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Daniel Ellsberg
On 27 October 1971, the writer met with Mr. Howard Hunt, Mr. David Young,
and Mr. Gordon Liddy in Mr. Young's office in the Executive Office Building.
The writer presented some of the thoughts and ideas developed from a review.
of material on the Ellsberg case.
prepare material in writing.
As a sequel, the writer was requested to
:
:
The notes were polished and were sent by way of the Director of Medical
Services to the Deputy Director for Support and on to the DCI for his knowledge
and agreement. It was therefore set up for the writer to visit again with
the gentlemen on Friday, 12 November, to present the material.
more.
In the course of this meeting the various details were gone over once
Each of these meetings with these gentlemen lasted for some three hours.
Mr. Young stated that it might be possible that further consultations
would be requested on the matter.
MA
M.D.
1
:: APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
:
2 May 1973
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Daniel Ellsberg
1
The writer today requested Dr. AB
review of such material as he may hold concerning the evaluation of
to make a joint
Daniel Ellsberg. Dr. AB
initial recollection was that he held
no material and that it had all been conveyed to the Office of Security.
An initial check with his secretary revealed no material either that
was available in the files. He then checked with Mrs. MC
former secretary who is now working in the office of the OMS Registrar.
, his
Mrs. MC was able to locate a sealed, Eyes Only envelope, unmarked,
containing a folder therein entitled "Indirect Assessment
In the folder are contained the following documents:
Ellsberg."
1. A carbon copy of an 18 August 1971 memorandum to the writer
from Dr. AB which begins, "In the context of a conversation
with Dr. MB concerning the 'Aging Leaders' paper..."
2. A 10 August 1971 yellow transmittal slipto "Dr. MD
FYI and return" from Dr. AB and initialed MD
11 August 1971, and stapled to
3.
4.
5.
, with
a transmittal slip dated 9 August 1971 to "Dry MA
with the remarks, "I have transmitted this to D/MS for his
reappraisal. "The changes are in paragraph 2, page 1; in the
second paragraph of page 2, and in the final sentences."
It is from Dr. AB. In hand and dated 10 August 1971 the
following is noted. "Fine. I hope that on the buck slip
you are authoring that some mention will be made for more data
if there is need for further and more precise consideration."
This is signed MA and stapled thereto
a 9 August 1971 carbon copy of a four-page paper concerning
Dr. Ellsberg, unsigned, and stapled thereto
a 5 August 1971 three-page carbon copy of an earlier version
of the same paper, also unsigned.
!
a
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
14-00000
Daniel Ellsberg - 2 May 1973
6. A burn copy of the 9 August 1971 four-page paper.
At this time, the above described envelope is being retained
by the writer, it having been turned over by Dr. AB who is reluctant
to retain it further at this point.
It is Dr. AB
recollection that the selected State Department
and FBI memoranda and the press reports, including newspaper and
magazine articles and television interviews, were returned to either
HB
or Mr. EB
of the Office of Security.
Mr.
MA
M.D.
Chief, Psychiatric Staff
Office of Medical Services
(no copies of this memorandum have been made)
2-

