104-10163-10050
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
201-
S
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Training, Attention: Chief, Covert
Training/Operations Schools Subject: Request for Covert Training
of ANCLATTER-1 (201-751687); From Division dated 6 July 1966.
1. ANCLATTER-1 received covert training in New York from
20 July through 21 August 1966. There was no substantial variance
in the curriculum as outlined in the original request.
2. Throughout the entire training period ANCLATTER-1 appeared
attentive, serious, and anxious to absorb as much as he could of
the training material. Although not particularly bright, he tried
hard and was able to grasp and put to practical use the principles
of tradecraft, elicitation, and agent handling and surveillance.
3. On this same time ANCLATTER-1 devoted many hours to casing
and laying out plans for dead drops and personal meetings, which
in almost all cases were excellent. Although rough in the begin-
ning, his efforts to achieve good results were remarkable by dint of
his ability to concentrate on the job at hand and do the best pos-
sible job under the circumstances.
4. On ANCLATTER's one surveillance exercise he performed
very well and submitted one of the best reports ever prepared by a
student. This excellent report, however, was the result of commit-
ting his one big fault which was the very obvious way in which he
took notes throughout the exercise.
5. ANCLATTER-1 worked hard at reporting, and after a somewhat
shaky start, proved able to write reasonably although his command of
English is limited. His current reports were excellent and his
information reports fair. In face to face situations, involving
unwitting informants and "arguments", ANCLATTER-1 performed very well.
His success in securing as much detail as possible in the time
allotted for the contacts was remarkable. At times, however, he
appeared to be carried away by his own enthusiasm which resulted in a
hurried approach to his work which under the circumstances might very
well have resulted in failure. He accepted the adverse criticism in
this matter and now realizes his mistakes.
6. ANCLATTER-1's best asset is his wish to improve his
performance in every phase of tradecraft, and in his own words,
eventually someday, be a professional. He realizes he has some
way to go but appears willing to work hard and long hours in
order to achieve his goals.
FOR THE DIRECTOR OF TRAINING
Originated by:
Griffith Jones
03
FANLIZIOH TAYLOR, JR.
CC/03/TR