14-00000
104-10119-10232
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
BS
D
iof
lief
Chief, CI/OA
10 SEP 1959
Acting Deputy Director of Security (Investigations and Support)
C-77119
#203377
: 1. Reference is made to your memorandum dated 16 April 1959
requesting an appropriate investigation of Subject in connection
24 with his use under an Operational Approval in an advisory capacity
by PP/PAD (world-wide) under Project SGLACTEAL
24
2. The enclosed information is furnished as an aid in deter-
mining whether or not the Subject should be used in the proposed
capacity.
3. During recent investigation of Subject, certain information
was developed which appears to reflect adversely upon his character,
professional activities and associates. This information, in addition
to checks of the Office of Security indices, is summarized as follows:
a.. Three developed informants commented favorably regarding
Subject's character, reputation and loyalty but one one informant stated
that Subject had been married three times and his present marriage almost
ended in divorce recently.
:..
b. Subject was fined $45 for a 1954 traffic violation and
his subsequent failure to appear at the hearing. One informant advised
Subject had recently been the object of inquiries by local police officers.
The informant believed this action resulted from unpaid parking tickets.
c. Subject's name appears numerous times in subversive files
on the West Coast. These items contain information about Subject's
activities in the Democratic Minority Conference and liste his pro-
fessional associates. In 1949 he was listed as a member of the Bar
committee against loyalty oaths for lawyers. He was shown as a close
associate of Vaito SPENCER, described by the files as a leftist, and
his activities were primarily concerned with local minor. ty groups.
These activities were extensively reported in the Communist Daily People's
BWorld.
e.
3 ft witness before the ente
d. Mrs. Vanio SPENCER represented Tassia FREED, a non-cooperative
179
오
5
T
P
adnitted Communist member. Security Office indices also reflect that
(
This dispo
bas served its purpunene...
to CIA Stuff Cry
in any manner wie
SECRET
turned when it
tt be dieclosed except
Soil not be reproduced
of Security Office.
14-00000
&
Call FREED is an admitted Communist Party member and took part in various
front activities in California over the years.
e. The Subject reportedly assisted Ralph H. HUTTER during the
trial of Anthony P. RIOS and Alfred ULLOA, nembers of the Cammity Sar-
vice Organization. NUTTER, according to Security Office indices, was a
close personal friend of Harrison Scott DROWN, security disapproved in 1955,
and favorably recommended him. NUTTER is also shown as a member of the
Los Angeles County Conference on Committee Relations (LACCR) as of October
1953. Mis organization, although not regarded as Communist-dominated,
sticks close to the Communist line and has spoken out against Los Angeles
Police Department brutality, teacher firing, loyalty oaths, book-burning
and witch-hunting by HCUA, thought control and UNESCO. NUTTER was also a
member of the Community Service Organization, which was regarded as infil-
trated by the Communist Party in 1954-55 and is influenced but not dominated
by the Party at the present time.
f. In January 1959, the Subject was interviewed by a representa-
tive of the OSI concerning his association with Reinhold Josuha WULF, con-
;
24
4. In view of the above information, this office recommends that
serious consideration be given to this matter prior to utilizing Subject
as proposed.
5. In view of the certification set forth in your request, no CIA
files other than those of the Office of Security have been searched in
connection with this case. It is assumed that all pertinent information
concerning Subject has been furnished pursuant to the provisions of Clandes-
tine Services Instruction No. 10-5 and Clandestine Services Instruction -
Field No. 10-5.
24.
6. This memorandum pertains only to this proposed assignment. It
is requested that this office be informed of your decision in this case.
The enclosed material should be returned in a sealed envelope marked for
the attention of the undersigned when it has served its purpose.
FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY:
Pred
11
Tus da
:
Enclosuress
R
Chock Rpt (28 August 1959)
(15
July 1959)
15 Fay & Ju
April 1948)
..
1
21

