14-00000
104-10219-10062
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
SX-28905
10 May 76
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Aleksandr Aleksandrovich ROZINKIN; William Hamilton MARTIN
SOURCE :
A radio engineer by education and a self-admitted former
KGB informant who emigrated from the Soviet Union in
January 1975. He graduated from the Leningrad Electro-
technical Institute and subsequently worked in Leningrad
at several classified scientific/technical establishments
and a branch of the Ministry of Foreign Trade. Later,
he was employed in Moscow at export branches of the
Ministry of Aviation Industry and the Ministry of Foreign
Trade, did some graduate work at the All-Union Machine
Building Institute, and worked as a translator at
Tsniistroymash. His reporting reliability and bona fides
have not been established.
DATE OF INFORMATION: June 1968 January 1975
DATE OF DEBRIEFING : 29 February 1976
1. Following his move from Leningrad to Moscow in June 1968,
Source met Aleksandr Aleksanrovich ROZINKIN, a translator who works
for a number of Soviet publishing houses in Moscow but actually
does his translation work at his residence (address: Moscow 452,
Balaklavskiy Prospekt, House No. 4, Korpus No. 5, Apartment No. 353;
home phone number: 110-2311). ROZINKIN's father is Jewish and his
mother is Great Russian: ROZINKIN graduated from the Moscow State
Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Languages imeni Maurice Thorez in
1956 or 1957, traveled to Australia in connection with a one-year
assignment as an interpreter attached to the Soviet antarctic
expedition, and traveled abroad to at least one other foreign
country (location unknown by Source). He was married twice. His
first wife (name unknown to Source) bore him a son and his second
(named Lena Inu) gave birth to a daughter. Although he is still
married to Lena, ROZINKIN does not reside with her and the daughter.
ROZINKIN loves his daughter and frequently visits her at his wife's
residence located in the area of the Preobrazhenskaya metro station
in Moscow. ROZINKIN had a mistress named Galina Sergeyevna ZHIRKOVA
(refer to SX-28663, dated 14 April 1976, for data on ZHIRKOVA) who
worked as a typist at the Higher Diplomatic School and was scheduled
to be assigned PCS in 1975 to a Soviet embassy in an unidentified
foreign country.
2. ROZINKIN expressed anti-Soviet regime attitudes to Source
and to other friends, and indicated he had thought in principle of
emigrating, but stated he did not wish to leave his daughter.
Although
he complained about Soviet propaganda and about life in the USSR in
SECRET
CROSS FILE COPY FOR
201233358
282335
DO NOT DESTROY
:
L
14-00000
SECRET
-2-
general, ROZINKIN, per Soviet standards, lived well in Source's
opinion. On one occasion in about January 1970 or 1971, Source
approached an American official in the restricted parking area of
the Luzhniki Palace of Sports in Moscow Source obtained a special
pass and parking permit from a friend in order to observe boxing.
matches, and while parking his car noticed what appeared to be an
American official car being driven by a foreigner. (Source claimed
that he already had thoughts of wanting to leave the Soviet Union
and hoped the American could help or perhaps provide some suggestions.
It should be noted, however, that Source was in at least semi-official
contact during this time frame with a KGB officer named Lev
Mikhaylovich GAVRILIN who reportedly was involved in operations
against American Embassy personnel.) During the brief conversation
which was held in English, the American official mentioned that he
was the assistant to the American Military Attache, replied to
Source's queries that Source's only chance of leaving the USSR would
be through approved TDY or tourist travel, gave Source a calling
card (Source could not recall the American's name), and suggested
that Source phone him the next day. Source mentioned the encounter
to ROZINKIN and on the following day ROZINKIN and Source phoned the
American from a public phone booth. (In actuality, ROZINKIN spoke
to the American during the telephone conversation because he was
considerably more fluent in the English language than Source.) The
American merely stated that there was nothing he could add to his
previous statements and the telephone conversation was terminated.
Source described the American as taller than average, having a thin
face and perhaps light colored hair; Source was uncertain of the
latter because the American wore a hat at the time of the initial
contact、 ROZINKIN had occasional contact with foreigners in Moscow
and reportedly had lengthy correspondence with an Australian national.
When questioned about the aforementioned correspondence and probable
Soviet knowledge of it, Source commented that ROZINKIN might have
been "hooked" by the KGB.
:
3. In approximately 1972 ROZINKIN introduced Source to an
American defector named fnu MARTIN at the latter's apartment in one
of only two high-rise apartment buildings located on the southeast
corner of the Obrucheva Akademika Ulitsa Leninskiy Prospekt
intersection in Moscow. Source visited MARTIN together with
ROZINKIN on one other occasion during the same year. The front door
to MARTIN's apartment had at least several locks. The apartment
itself, consisting of two rooms, had unidentified security devices,
according to ROZINKIN who related to Source most of the information
reported below. MARTIN, who had stereo equipment and played music
during the two brief encounters, allegedly would not permit anyone
into his apartment without receiving an advance phone call. He
had some capability in the Russian language and reportedly was not
married at that time. Based on what ROZINKIN mentioned, MARTIN,
during his early years in Moscow, surrounded himself with prostitu
and black marketeers who often visited his apartment, and had been
treated in a Soviet psychiatric clinic at one time. He later became
suspicious of people and frightened of possibly being apprehended
or harmed by American authorities and therefore curtailed his social
SECRET
:
:
:
:
:
14-00000
SECRET
-3-
activities and became cautious in inviting visitors to his
apartment. No important or interesting Soviets associated with
him on a social basis. He allegedly consumed large amounts of
alcohol and usually was found in a rotten mood. ROZINKIN stated
that MARTIN received 500 rubles per month from the Soviet
authorities and had been assigned to work at the Institute of
Mathematics imeni Steklova, but actually did not work there.
ROZINKIN also remarked once that MARTIN indicated he felt he made
a mistake in defecting to the Soviets and regretted it. Reportedly,
MARTIN has had contacts with foreign diplomats in Moscow and in
this connection ROZINKIN stated that a Swedish diplomat offered
his assistance to spirit MARTIN out of the Soviet Union, apparently
through the use of a diplomatic vehicle. MARTIN, as Source was told,
declined the offer because he was afraid that the Americans would
get ahold of him once he left the USSR.
4. Source claimed he did not know the reason for ROZINKIN'S
association with MARTIN and only guessed that ROZINKIN may have been
involved in obtaining translation work for MARTIN. Relative to this,
however, Source stated it was his (Source's) impression that MARTIN
had no interest in seeking any form of employment. As concerned
Source's relationship with ROZINKIN, in the fall of 1973 ROZINKIN
became miffed at Source's one-time ill treatment of him (ROZINKIN)
during a petty incident and the friendship dissolved at that time.
They did not see each other after the incident and ROZINKIN did not
bid farewell to Source at the time of the latter's emigration from
the Soviet Union. Source did not know ROZINKIN's friends well, but
did state that ROZINKIN was a very close friend of Yuriy pnu SHIROKOV
(a translator/interpreter who had studied at the Moscow Institute of
International Relations, is the son of a Soviet diplomat, and has a
good capability in the English language).
5. Traces:
A. For traces on Lev Mikhaylovich GAVRILIN see SX-28669,
dated 26 April 1976.
*GAVRILIN, Lev Mikhaylovich
SEX: M
!
:
DOB:
POB: USSR
CIT: USSR
OCC: KGB officer
LOC: USSR
Reportedly involved in operations against American Embassy
personnel in USSR. Known to Soviet emigre 201-0939684.
B. Fnu MARTIN is William Hamilton MARTIN (201-0232338), a
former NSA employee, who defected to the USSR in 1960.
C. There are no Headquarters traces on Aleksandr Aleksandro-
vich ROZINKIN.
SECRET
!
14-00000
SECRET
-4-
*ROZINKIN, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich
SEX: M
DOB:
POB: USSR
CIT: USSR
OCC: Translator
LOC: USSR
Does work for a number of Soviet publishing houses.
Has expressed anti-Soviet sentiments. Known to Soviet
émigre 201-0939684.
D. There are no identifiable Headquarters traces on Yuriy
SHIROKOV.
Leo G. Karpoff
SE/SAG/OP
SE/SAG/OP: Traces: John Cummings:ek
Distribution:
Orig & 1 IP/AN (Please classify into 201-0939684, index the
indicated names in para 5 and B-code into 201-0232338)
1 - C/SE/SAG, SE/USSR
1
SE/SAG/OP chrono:
1
SE/CI/I
SECRET

