14-00000
104-10116-10266
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JLUIILI
In March 1953 he misrepresented himself as a polygraph operator with the
"State Department Secret Police". This misrepresentation was made at a
time when the Department of State was not authorized to have a polygraph
machine and Congressional legislation was pending at the time regarding
such authorization. As a result of this misrepresentation, Subject was
afforded another security interview in March 1953. He explained that
his cover company sold equipment to foreign countries through the Mutual
Aid Program and supplied consultant services to the State Department but
Subject denied that he ever represented himself as a State Department
polygraph operator. After the security interview Subject was also assessed
by an Agency psychologist (March 1953) and was found to be egotistical,
emotionally unstable, possessed of a need to build himself up in the
eyes of others and gave either exaggerated or completely erroneous
information as to his past positions. His intelligence quotient was found
to be comparatively low in relation to those of other (Agency employees.
In April 1953 termination of his employment was recommended.
08
Subject resigned 29 April 1953 "to accept a position in California.
Washington climate is not agreeable to his family."
In April 1964 Mr. J. Kirk BAREFOOT, Director of Security, McKesson
and Robbins, Skokie, Illinois, informed the Agency he had been a witness
to unauthorized disclosures of classified information made by a group in
a cocktail lounge in Omaha, Nebraska. The individual making the disclosures
about (ENDOMORPH activities abroad under Agency sponsorship was identified
as Leonard HARRELSON. Subject, who was then Director of Public Safety
for the City of Omaha, Nebraska, was one of the group and it was believed
that he was responsible for supplying the classified information to HARRELSON
about ENDOMORPH activities.
02
Leonard HARRELSON is a private investigator specializing in hypnotism
and the use of the polygraph machine. In 1964 he was employed by the Keeler
Polygraph Company in Chicago, Illinois. In 1954 HARRELSON was in partnership
with Lloyd B. FURR in a private detective agency known as the American
Bureau of Investigation, Tower Building, Washington, D. C. Lloyd B. FURR
is the polygraph operator who gave a lie detector test to Gordon NOVEL,
hostile witness subpoenaed by GARRISON. The test received newspaper publicity
as being given at "McLean, Va." in March 1967. (Summary on FURR attached).
HARRELSON is believed to be a person of poor morals. He was given
a medical discharge from the Army as a psychoneurotic in 1949 and had been
court-martialed twice for impersonating non-commissioned officers of a
rank higher than he possessed. In his business partnership with FURR,
HARRELSON would misrepresent himself as being with the FBI by covering the
word "American" when presenting his credentials and just showing "Bureau
of Investigation".
Incidentally, the informant, J. Kirk BAREFOOT mentioned above, was
disapproved for Agency employment in 1951 because of falsification of his PHS,
and questionable maturity, judgment, discretion and honesty.
SECRET
5
BR
14-00000
SUBJECT: GUGAS, Chris
SECRET
14 August 1968
Subject is identified as a California investigator who administered
a polygraph test to Edgar Eugene BRADLEY who has been charged with conspiracy
by GARRISON.
08
Subject was born 12 August 1921 at Omaha, Nebraska. He is a former
Agency) employee who (EOD) in October 1949 as a GS-9 Intelligence Officer
Subject resigned his staff status in February 1951 and became a staff
agent with Project (ENDOMORPH in Turkey) from March 1951 until July 1952.
(His wife Anne Claudia GUGAS nee SETARO was granted a covert security clearance
in February 1952 for use in a clerical capacity in the Middle East.)
02
いい
In his assignment with Project (EN) DOMORPH in [Turkey, Subject was a
11
source of constant embarrassment in his contacts with Turkish police
officials. He was boastful, indiscreet, lacking in sound judgment, knew
little or nothing in the fields in which he was self-professedly an expert
and was guilty of security breaches in failing to maintain his cover.
In one incident he made recommendations of police reorganizations to be
made by province governors in Turkey; whereas, in Turkey, the Police
Department is a national organization and not subject to the dictates of
the province governors. This caused much ill will and friction with the
Turkish police.
il
Subject professed to be an expert in his knowledge of the polygraph
machine and claimed he had two years' experience with the Los Angeles
Police Department prior to his employment with the Agency KKC KC However, it
was developed that instead of this claimed experience, he had actually
spent one or two weeks in a detective school connected with the Los Angeles
Police Department where he received below average grades.
In October 1952 he approached an Agency employee regarding a new
type of technical equipment and this conversation led to the disclosure
by Subject that he was employed by the Agency in a covert capacity; that
he was teaching lie detection techniques to foreign police departments
without being authorized or competent to do so. Subject was briefed in
December 1952 with stress placed on the importance of living up to his
security responsibilities and exercising utmost precaution in protecting
the covert interests of the Agency
08
In spite of the strong warnings given him in this interview, Subject
again became involved in an incident of official embarrassment to the Agency.
१
08
GROUP 1
17
Excluded from autematic
SECRET
downgrading and
BR
declassification
C

