14-00000
104-10250-10081
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Januar 22, 1965.
Subject: Contact with Mr. Kimsey after his Separation from CIA.
As my former supervisor for 6 years in the Agency, Mr. K. apparently
wanted to keep up a superficial social contact with me. Every 3 or 4 months, he
called me at home or in the office; as a rule, first to inform me of some article or
TV program which could be of interest to me or my husband, and second, to inform
me of his various professional prospects. As far as I recall, there were twe or
three meetings for lunch in the cafeteria across the road from the West Out Building
and one dinner invitation in our home. The first lunch meeting may have been in
spring 1963. According to my recollection, Mr. K. gave me the reproduction of a
small English handwriting specimen which was supposedly written by the Grand
Duchess "Anastasia" of Russia, Mr. K. asked me to send a short report to Cleve
Baxter, New York City, who was working on the case that a woman Eugenia Smith
claimed to be "Anastasia". I sent a report that the questioned document was pro-
bably written by an English speaking person, to Cleve Baxter. (I had met Cleve
Baxter previously at an Academy for the Advancement/Science meeting in New York.
Mr. K. had claimed that C.B. is his friend and former business associate and that
he had worked for CIA.) To my knowledge, this was the only connection of Mr. K.
with my work for the "Anastasia" case.
:
-
of
In summer 1963, we got suddenly a telephone call from Mr. K. informing us
that he had gotten married and had returned from his honeymoon trip to San Fran-
cisco for which he had used up his retirement money. In August or September 1963,
we invited him and his wife Lois (whom he wanted us to meet) for dinner in our
house. Lois was a good-looking, very lively woman, around forty, who made so much
small talk that, to our amazement, Mr. K. hardly said a word. My husband and I,
both had the impression that the marriage would not last long. - In April 1964,
14-00000
2
Mr. K. called me up again, because he had to tell me something. We met for lunch
in the cafeteria, and he told me most confidentially that Lois had left him and
lived in an apartment downtown. They simply had not been able to get along. That
was the last time I saw Mr. K.--
Since that time, there cannot have been more than 2 or 3 telephone calls.
He never informed me about his job with the Goldwater campaign; this, I heard
through the grapevine in the Agency. - The last time, I heard from Mr. K. was a
telephone call in the Agency shortly before Christmas. He asked for ny address
(which is in the telephone book), apparently in order to send us a Christmas card.
Then he told me some details about Mr. Goldwater's handwriting, as if he had infermed
me about his previous assignment. And when I asked him about his professional pro-
spects, he stated that there are new developments in New York regarding the
"Anastasia" case and that he is going to have a hand in this. As I did not ask any
further questions, this was the end of the conversation. - The next thing I saw,
was the "Daily News" article.
:
Subject: My Work for the "Anastasia" Case.
In September 1963, I received various late night telephone calls from Cleve
Baxter in New York City, explaining details of the case involving Eugenia Smith
who claims to be "Anastasia". C.B. asked me to look over the handwriting material
he has and make any comments related to it which could give some psychological clues.
As I left the following weekend for Puerto Rico, C.B. sent the handwriting mater-
ial (from 1912 to 1963) to the hotel there, asking for an early reply. I sent a
report regarding psychological aspects in the development of the handwriting, more
or less as a basis for the work which would have to be done by a questioned document
examiner. After that, I did not hear much anymore, except that the publisher
Speller and Co. (for whom C.B. was working) sentime a copy of the book "Anastasia",
14-00000
3
I never made a handwriting analysis of the case, and the bill for the work I had
done was never paid. To my knowledge, in this phase of my work, there was not
any connection with Mr. K., and he was not even mentioned in my conversations with
Cleve Baxter.
Two weeks ago, Mr. Baxter sent me (without comment) the reprint of a New
Hampshire newspaper, in which the appearance of the former "Czar", a former CIA
agent, a Polish Col. G., was mentioned. I marked this passage and brought
it to the office, where John Gittinger forwarded it immediately to Faul Gaynor,
from where it was returned a few days later.
Subject: The Former CIA Agent, the Polish Col. G.
In my contacts with Mr. K. and with Cleve Baxter, this man was never mentioned
and I did not know of his existence; until I read the article in the New Hampshire
newspaper. It goes without saying that I never made a graphological analysis of his
handwriting, as-per their request.
It is possible that I did work for the Agency on this man's handwriting under
some cover number or crypt, but up to now, we have not yet been able to identify it.
03
(Thee Si Hall)
Thea S. Hall,

