104-10179-10224
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Copy of Secret and Fercomamered telegrad srom
Governor of Bahamas to Colonial Office dated June 4.
"HAS Decoy", United States Bahamas guardship,
on afternoon of June 1 in consecuence of suspicious
behaviour by small vessel leaving Anguilla Cay, landed
party and then with assistance of United States Coastguard
aircraft apprehended vessel. Landing parties found three
Cubans on Anguilla Cay, one of whom had automatic rifle
and revolver and ammunition and another of whom had F.N..
rifle. A cuantity of grenades and five rifled-barrel<
weapons and ammunition were found on or near beach.
Explosives and detonators were recovered from weighted
bag obviously dropped from vessel. "HMS Decoy" brought
vessel and seven men and one woman to Nassau on June 3.
Attorney-General is satisfied that there is prima facie
case against four men and one woman found in small boat and
against three Cubans subsequently brought from Anguilla Cay.
Police investigation is proceeding but all eight will be
brought before magistrate in Nassau on June 4.
I understand from Commissioner of Police that intense
international interest has been manifested about identity.
of one of the Cubans. Press and television representatives
who have arrived here are asking whether police have Manuelo
Ray in custody. Police have reason to suppose that one
Cuban who gave his name as Martinez is in truth Manuelo Ray.
Ray's wife has telephoned Nassau today asking to speak to
him.
Whether or not Martinez is in fact Ray, my official
(advisers and I are satisfied that law must be allowed to take
its course. Even if the most favourable possible construction
were to be put on facts known to Royal Navy and United States
Coastguard, and the Cuban's vessel was at Anguilla Cay solely
because of engine trouble, there is no acceptable.explanation
of an unauthorised presence ashore of Cubans possessing arms
and ammunition.
Commissioner of police thinks that if-overseas
Press representatives claim to recognise one of the Cubans
as Ray when they are brought before the court, there may
be anti-British demonstration in Miami. It would be well
to warn British Consul in Miami urgently but I have no
secure means of doing so speedily.
Police inform me that among persons apprehended
by "HMS Decoy" in small boat were a reporter and a
photographer from "Life" magazine.
