14-00000
104-10071-10192
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
NO FORRIGE DISSEN
15.15 AN INFORMATION REPORT, NUI FINALLY EVALUATED INTELLIGENCE
THIS IS
8-E-C-R-E-T
REPORT NO.
DATE DISTR. 7 March 1968
COUNTRY
Costa Rica
DOI
9 February
4 March 1968
SUBJECT
ACQ
SOURCE
:
Letter, written by Fernando Melo, 17
Indicating That Negotiations
C. Between Ludwig Starke and Rolando
Masferrer Were Not Progressing
こん
Welle byjou Hen
Costa Rica, San Jose
(4 March 1968)
八
Static...
FIELD NO.
HRS-4108
22
Iini
An official Costa Rican service.J
ل
24
Mis:
Pinto
Cliicoita
Pien
2
22
1. (Field Comment: The following, report should be read
in conjunction with TECS-314/01096-68 (HR3-4065) and
22(H3)4099), which reported that Fernando
Molo Fontanills, a Cuban oxile in Costa Rica, wie serving as
an Intornediary in negotiations between ladvig Starko Jimenez,
a Costa Rican right-wing extremist, and Bolando asferrer, a
Cuban oxile in the United States who was involved in plotting
against the government of President Rene Duvalior of Haiti.
The negotiations dealt with a plan whereby Starke vould pro-
vide a staging area for an invasion of Haiti by Haitian and
In return Mas-
Cuban exiles under Hasforrer's leadership.
ferrer, if successful, would subsequently support a nove by
Starko against the Costa Rican Government. Helo was reported
to be planning a trip to New York on 21 February 1988 to talk
with Naeferrer and the latter'a representative in the negotia-
tions, Father Diego Madrigal Alvarez.)
2. When Melo returned to San Jose on 2 March after
visiting New York City and Miami, Florida, he was detained
and searched by security officials at the airport. Among
Melo's possessions the security officials found a lottor,
signed by Helo, addressed to Father Diego Madrigal, New York.
The letter was dated 9 February 1968. It as typewritten on
letterhead stationery of Rogelio R. Pinto Impresos. (Costa 24
Rican Service Comment: Melo sells printing equipment and
thus may have sybusiness connection with the Pinto firm;
however, Rogelfo Pinto has been reported in the past to have
been involved in plotting against the Costa Rican Government.)
8-E-C-R-E-T NO FOREIGN DISSEM
DISTRIBUTION
Lether indicato
indicating
!
A
14-00000
Page 2 of 2 Pages
8-E-C-R-E-T. NO FOREIGN DISSEM
3. Melo's lottor acknowledged receipt of a cable from
Molo
Madrigal; it then went on to state that "Rogelio obtained
the visa" and now "the Haitian can come when he wishes."
(Field Comment: Rogelio may be Rogelio Pinto. RS-4099 22
quoted Molo as saying that Starke bad obtained a visa for
Jacques Horinglane, a Haitian who would be the first of
the Masferrer group to arrive in Costa Rica.) Melo then wrote
that because nothing had been heard frca Madrigal since the
latter's visit to Costa Rica "the friends hero" had begun to
believe that "everything has been a pipe dream of nine; that
we neither are going to do anything mor have anything."
complained that Madrigal's silence appeared to have "lossonod
the enthusiam of this man of action and of rapid resolutions,
who does not like to be made to wasto his time." Malo warned
Madrigal that if the Masferrer group had not reached a deci-
sion to move ahead with the plan, it would be better for the
Maitian not to come to Costa Rica. Nolo also warned that if
there were no Cubans participating in Masferrer's project, he,
Holo, would not support it, since he was interested only in
the Cubans' problems and not those of tho Haitians. Melo in-
fornod Madrigal that he expected to arrive in New York on 18
February; he suggested that they discuss the subject in detail
at that tine.
4. On 4 March Helo again left Ban Jose for Miami. ΗΘ
told the Costa Rican security officials that he would be away
from Costa Rica for a month.
5. Field Disse:
State Aray CINCSO
Rolandu Mies
In velvet
thi
Davitie.
In
I'lotting
st
a

