14-00000
104-10187-10038
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
• Do Not Reproduce
WH/SA 64-489
25 June 1964
MENCRANDUM FOR:
Chief, WH/Operations (ar. Hood)
:
Deputy Chief, WH/SA (Air. Cheever)
:
Handling of AMMUG-1 Operation
VIA
SUBJECT
L. During a meeting with Mr. Hood, C/WH/Ops; Air. Cheever,
DC/WH/SA and Mr. Swenson, C/WH/SA/CI on 23 June 1964,
Air. Swenson reviewed the following points concerning the handling
of the AMMUG-1 operation. These points were the subject of
earlier discussions by A.r. Swenson and the various Branch chiefs
in WH Division.
2. From the outset WH/SA/CI's proposed action for handling
AdiMUG-1 has been:
a. To debrief AUG-1 soonest and to get the information
to the appropriate country desks as soon as possible. To run
traces, including field traces, and to analyze the results. Traces
to be run by WH/SA/CI on Cuban Is staffers and by the WH country
desks on Cuban IS agents in their respective countries.
b. To select the best targets froin the individuals identified
by AMMUG-1 and to hit them in order of priority, considering their
overall value, chance of success, accessability and perishability.
The selection of targets to be done jointly by WH/SA/CI and the WH
desks,
(1) To give consideration to approaching the Cuban IS
agents before the Cuban Is staffers since the agents are less likely
to show about AMA.UG-l's defection and in most cases they have a
greater communication proolein in reporting back to the DGI. (The
Cuban IS staffers known to AMMUG-1 can not all be recalled or
transferred, and even if transferred could still te hit by AMAMUG-L)
14-00000
2
(2) To use AMMUG-1 for making pitches to selected
targets, agents first and stalfers second as explained above.
c. To provide the information acquired from debriefing
AB: MUG-Lto the Canadians (RCAP) who were very cooperative in
helping us get AMMUG-1 and his documents out of Canada and into
the United States
24
(1) To also give the British what we give the Canadians) 24
since the Canadians have already informed them of AMUG-4 and
to prompt them to take any action as we may wish,
(2) To give pertinent information to other services
who can help us in locating and monitoring targets.
24
d. Meanwhile, as in the AM:MP-1 case (another Cuban IS
defector who has provided us with considerable information and
has been used in a number of approaches), to disseminate appropriate
information to the U.S. intelligence community. In the case of
personalities, the CSCI dissemination would consist only of biographic
and descriptive data furnished by AMMUG-1, including appropriate
Headquarters traces. We would request information from then in
return. (This procedure has been used in the AMINIP-1 case.)
e. To decide what information we should give the various
Latin American services so that the agents could be arrested and
interrogated once a recruitment approach fails.
]24.
1. To work out in cooperation with the CI and CA staffs what
can be done in the event it may be useful at sonte future date to
publicize AMAMUG-l's defection by releasing certain information to
the press or by possibiy having himm appear before the Grganisation
of American States.
3. The above represents a general outline of what our overall
planning has been in connection with the AM.MUG-1 case since we
wrought him to the United States. The role of WH/SA/Cl as I under-
stand it is to manage and coordinate the overall aspects of the
operation and to see that no unilateral action is taken by any one
interested desk or office that may have dan.aging affects on other
aspects of the operation.
Distribution:
Orig & Addresses
2 WH/SA/CI
Harold F. Swenson
Chief, WH/SA/CI