1000000
104-10332-10004
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Assassination Records Review Board
600 E Street NW 2nd Floor Washington, DC 20530
(202) 724-0088 - Fax: (202)724-0457
April 8, 1996
HAND DELIVERED
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
Mr. Kevin O'Brien
Chief, FOI/PA Section
Federal Bureau of Investigation
10th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20535
Re:
Additional Information Request No. FBI-12 (Mark Lane)
Dear Kevin:
The ARRB staff requests access to review references to Mark Lane or the Citizens
Committee of Inquiry in the files of FBI Headquarters and the New York field office for
the time from November 1963 to date. This request includes, but is not limited to, any
communications involving Mr. Lane intercepted via electronic surveillance. In the
event that records responsive to this request have already been transmitted to the JFK
Collection, or have already been identified for processing under the JFK Act, please so
advise.
Thank you for your continuing cooperation.
Sincerely yours,
David G. Marwell
Executive Director
BOARD MEMBERS: John R. Tunheim, Chair Henry F. Graff Kermit L. Hall William L. Joyce Anna K. Nelson
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR: David G. Marwell
13-00000
SECRET
SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Fred Wickham
21 June 1996
DO Focal Point for
JFK Board Requests
FROM:
Barry Harrelson
Historical Review Group
SUBJECT:
JFK Board request to FBI re Mark Lane
REFERENCE:
Additional Information Request No. FBI-12
dtd. 8 April 1996 (attached)
1.
The staff of the Assassination Record Review Board
(JFK Board) has requested access to FBI files on Mark Lane
(see reference). The attached "ODYSSEY" document was found
in the FBI's Mark Lane file; the FBI has denied access to
the document pending a response from the CIA.
2. This is a request for access only. According to
the FBI, no documents in the Mark Lane files have not been
designated "Assassination Records" to date. Please advise
on the sensitivity of the "Odyssey" project and what
restriction, if any, would be placed on access to the
attached document.
3. We would appreciate your response by 5 July as to
granting access to the document. If you have questions you
can contact me at extension 30292.
Attachments: As stated
CL BY;
611637
CL REASON: 1.5c
DECL On:
X1
DRV FROM:
MI
13-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
5-07-98
Jeremy,
Attached is a copy of the Mark Lane item. The source
statement was added at the request of the Foreign
government. The rest of this item is a copy of the text of
the relevant portions of the document. I have alerted
Linda that you will be calling.
Barry
13-00000
MAY 04 '98 12:52PM
P.2
SECRET SENSITIVE
The source of the following information a Foreign,
Government which specifically requested not be identified.
ACTIVE MEASURES
The KGB exerted a positive influence on the US in order
to overcome the financial crisis facing the UN. In January
1965 an operations officer laid out the Soviet point of view
in a conversation with a First Secretary at the US Embassy.
in Moscow, and the New York Residency expressed these same.
views to American newspaper correspondents and to UN
representatives of a number of countries. On 04 February an
agent in Moscow succeeded in getting prepared information to
the American Ambassador. These actions brought about a
change in the UN's position regarding this financial problem
and pushed the American delegation to reach a compromise.
Mark LANE is well known as a person with close ties to
Democratic Party circles in the US. Heholds liberal views
on a number of current American political problems, and has
undertaken to conduct his own private investigation of the
circumstances surrounding the murder of J. KENNEDY. This
coincided with the interests of the KGB, and the New York
Residency, through a trusted contact, passed LANE 1500
dollars for his work on a book, and 500 dollars for a trip
to Europe in connection with the investigation he was
conducting. This trusted contact of the Residency was a
close friend of LANE'S. LANE was not told who was financing
his work, but he might have been able to guess, the US
special services might also have known about this, if LẠNH
was under observation at this time. While in Europe in
1964, he wanted to visit Moscow and acquaint the authorities
there with the revealing materials he had regarding the
KENNEDY murder. The authorities took into consideration the
sensitive nature of LANE's investigative activities and did
not wish to enter into difficulties with the US, LANE's trip
was therefore tactfully postponed indefinitely. Trusted
contacts from among Soviet journalists met with LANE, and
beginning in 1969 Borovik maintained regular contact with
him. LANE once again expressed to Borovik his desire to
visit Moscow and show the authorities there the film that he
had put together, which discredited the official version of
the President's murder. Once again he was delicately told
that the time was not right for such a trip, since the
American government might begin a slander campaign against
him in connection with his involvement in the anti-war
movement. American Communists who were in Moscow in 1971
expressed the opinion that, although LANE was engaged in
13-00000
MAY 04 '98 12:53PM
SECRET SENSIS
P.3
activity that was advantageous to the Communists, he was
doing this not without profit to himself, and sought to
achieve personal popularity and become a national figure.
Other investigators and KENNEDY assassination buffs
were supplied by the KGB not only with money, but also with
circumstantial evidence that made the affair appear to be a
well-concealed political conspiracy..
On 18 August 1975 photocopies of a note from Lee Harvey
OSWALD, prepared at Center, were sent from Mexico to three
American citizens who were independent investigators of the
circumstances of President KENNEDY's murder. The content of
the note was as follows:
"8 November 1963.
Dear Mr. HUNT, I would like to receive information about my
position. I only want information. I propose that we meet
and discuss this matter thoroughly before any steps are
taken by me or by someone else. Thank you, Lee Harvey
OSWALD."
The conception of this active measure, codenamed
"Arlington," was based on the use of an assassination theory
that was widespread in the US, according to which theory
Howard HUNT, a former CIA employee who was convicted in 1974
in connection with the Watergate affair, participated in
1963 in organizing a plot, the victim of which was President
KENNEDY.
The note given above was composed using individual
phrases and expressions taken. from letters written by OSWALD
during his stay in the USSR, the note was written in
OSWALD's handwriting on a scrap of the writing paper that
OSWALD used in Texas. This note was on two occasions.
subjected to graphological and chronological examination
"for authenticity" by the Third Section of the KGB's OTU
[Operational-Technical Directorate).
OSWALD's note was accompanied by a another note:
"Sir: At one time Mr. KELLY from the FBI received from
me a document which, in my opinion, will help shed light on
the circumstances surrounding the murder of President
KENNEDY. Since KELLY has to date not done anything with
this document, I, fearing the worst, and forced to disappear
for a time. Knowing that you are engaged in an independent
investigation of the President's murder, I am sending you a
copy of the document. With best wishes, Yours, P.S."
13-00000
MAY 04 '98 12:54PM
P.4
SECRET SENSTTTVE
It was intended that the person who received the
photocopy of the OSWALD note would request that FBI Director
KELLY produce the original note. KELLY, naturally, would
deny that he had received such a note, and this would
encourage the investigator even more to obtain the desired
document.
The note was sent to: Harold WEISBERG, the author of
several books about the KENNEDY assassination that rejected
the official version put out by the Warren Commission,
argued for the existence of a political conspiracy, and
investigated OSWALD's ties to the special services; Dan
JONES, the editor of the Midlothian Mirror newspaper, who
had investigated the assassination from the point of view of
a conspiracy, and Howard HOFMAN (possibly HOFFMAN), and
historian from Philadelphia who had investigated the KENNEDY
assassination and cast doubt upon the conclüsions of the
Warren Commission.
The documentary operation "Arlington" was carried out
in such a way as to fuel (the flames of suspicion) with
fresh news and to expose the participation of the American
special services in the liquidation of KENNEDY.
At the beginning of March 1977 the first reference to
the "previously unknown note from Lee Harvey OSWALD"
appeared in the American press. The Minister of Justice
[sic--i.e., Attorney General] announced that it was
"impossible to determine through laboratory testing whether
the letter was authentic or fabricated." However, at the
beginning of April there appeared in the New York Times an
official report by three handwriting experts, who concluded
that "the note dated 08 November 1963 was written by Lee
Harvey OSWALD." The authenticity of the OSWALD note was
also reinforced by a reference to the testimony of Lee
Harvey's widow, Marina. American newspapers, however, did
not tie OSWALD to the HUNT who had formerly worked for the
CIA, but rather to his namesake, HUNT, who was a deceased
Texas oil millionaire.
The FCD's disinformation service believed that OSWALD'S
connection with HUNT the millionaire, rather than with HUNT,
the CIA officer, was purposely played up in the American
press in order to divert public attention from OSWALD'S
contacts with the special services. In February Howard HUNT
was unexpectedly released from prison on 10,000 dollars
bail, which had been posted for him by "unknown persons."
Newspapers emphasized the fact that "KELLY, the current FBI
Director, who had received the original document, had
concealed it from the public and had not circulated it."
13-00000
MAY 04 '98 12:55PM
P.5
SECRET SENSITIVE
After the report about the "OSWALD notes had appeared
in the press, the report of a special House of
Representatives Commission investigating the assassinations
of J. KENNEDY and Martin Luther KING was published in the
US. This report spoke of "new evidence" that the Commission
had obtained regarding the KENNEDY assassination. Congress
decided to extend the functioning of this House of
Representatives Commission for another two years.
In April 1977 the KGB informed the Central Committee of
the CPSU that it would take additional measures to promote
theories regarding the participation of the American special
services in a political conspiracy directed against
President KENNEDY.
The Disinformation Service made a point of commenting
on every significant world event and interpreting it through
its own prism. The following operations continued: the
"Arlington" operation, dealing with CIA participation in
organizing President KENNEDY's assassination.
13-00000
SECRET
CL BY: 0611637
CL REASON: Section 1.5 C
DECL ON: X1
DRV FRM: HUM 4-82
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Lee S. Strickland @ DA
Fredrick C. Wickham @ DO
William H. McNair @ DO
Becky L. Rant @ DA
Teresa Wilcox @ DST
MaryLou Cummings
Barbara T. Blufer
15 May 1998
FROM:
J. Barry Harrelson
JFK Project Officer
OFFICE:
OIM/HRP
SUBJECT:
ARRB Meeting 13 May 1998 -- Results
REFERENCE:
Lotus note dated 8 May -- ARRB Meeting 12-13 May 1998
The JFK Board addressed six Agency issues at the 13 May meeting. The Agency's proposals prevailed in four of the six issues
and one issue was tabled for further discussion. The Board made the following determinations:
1) Alias Documentation and Accommodation Addresses:
accepted our proposal to postpone release of specific information until 2017 and use generic substitute language.
City story]:
2) LITAMIL-9 [CIA penetration of Cuban Embassy in Mexico City/considered a "key player" in the Oswald-Mexico
agreed to continue to protect the full crypt and delay the release of additional documents (201 file) until his death.
They set an annual review date on the documents; the Agency will need to advise NARA annually on his status.
3) Richard Gibson [member of Fair Play for Cuba Committee during early 60's/considered a "key player in
Oswald's story/Agency asset beginning in 1965]:
agreed protect Gibson's relationship with the Agency and designated Agency and FBI files and documents
outside the JFK collection window, 1960-64, as NBRs (not believed relevant).
4) AMTRUNK Assets [AMTRUNK was an early 1960's anti-Cuban operation; most of the details of the operation
including crypts have been previously released):
SECRET
13-00000
SECRET
agreed to protect true name and 201 file numbers of assets not previously released.
5) Mark Lane Item [extract from foreign document]:
postponed until 4 June meeting; board would like have a member or its staff confirm the existence of the
document and ensure that it contains no other JFK assassination related information.
6) Carlos Tepedino [CIA asset/ key figure in AMLASH-Cubela plot to kill Castro/true name and role in story has
been publicly known for years]:
voted to release his name in the 1967 IG Report on Plots Against Castro and other JFK collection documents
The Stone/Golitsyn issue was pulled from the agencd and will be addressed at the next meeting (4 June).
This was a very successful meeting from the Agency's perspective. The loss on Tepedino was not unexpected. Given what is
in the public domain, the Agency has not been able to make a persuasive argument to protect his name in the three years Tepedino has
been at issue. Thanks to all who assisted in preparing for the meeting, and especially to Steve White and Dick Kinsman who prepared the
issue and talking point papers that carried the day.
CC:
SECRET