14-00000
104-10236-10008
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
17 October 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR: COS GI
SUBJECT: Intelligence Collection Program for AMBUD
REFERENCES: A. WAVE-8984
B. DIR-38443
C. WAVE-9108
D. DIR-39823
1. As per reference D Headquarters concurs in this program and has offered
to forward requirements if JMWAVE so desires. Since this approval was obtained
from Headquarters, I have taken the following steps: (A) requested and obtained
some requirements from IS to be used in this program and (B) through PASSAVOY
have requested some basic information as to specific facilities for use in this
program. AMBUD-1 is to advise us on the following matters: if the Hotel Monroe,
for which AMBUD receives approximately $800 per month, has space available for
the establishment of an interrogation center; if AMBUD, has individuals now on its
payroll who could be used in this program as interrogators and translators; if
AMBUD-1 has, as requested, advised the group members of AMBUD to each appoint
an individual as "Jefe de Informacion"x in such cases where one does not already
exist.
2. My primary purposesin setting up this collection program ts/to obtain
useful information and to make AMBUD a useful organization with a purpose in mind--
a purpose with practical and visible ends. AMBUD is a large organization composed
of a number&ben@ups and individuals which also has affiliates who are rot actual
members. The/personnel availbe to it is undoubtedly unequailed in the WAVE Area.
From this vast reserve of manpower, there is every reason to believe competent
interrogators can be found, although most of them would naturally need training in
interrogation and reporting techniques, which factor can be surmounted. In addition
to the AMBUD personnel supply, there is also a vast, untouched number of sources
of information in the WAVE area. For example, part of each plane load whts of exiles
which arrives from Cuba is released by Imnigration; the remainder (about 2/3) are
sent to CAC. Of that number all are screened at CAC and about are actually
interrogated at CAC due to the lack of personnel to handle any more cases. In sxksx
Maxx addition, no women arriving from Cuba are interrogated at CAC. Therefore,
the number of persons who are potential sources of information available to AMBUD
would be approximately 2/3 of all those arriving from Cuba, plus all the women.
3. I think we should approcah this information collection program with an
anactivity to keep AMBUD busy or make them feel they are contributing to the casse.
aim of making it an actual going concern and not a holding operation or as just
As a result, I plan to make up a chart, or table of organization, of an actual
interrogation center for this purpose, In addition, I will make an estimate
of any additional expenses which might be involved in the near future. Since I
have had actual KUBARK experience in an interrogation center, I believe I am
at least somewhat qualified to make certain suggestions. (FYI: in the joint
KUBARK/Spanish Interrogation Center created for the interrogation of Spanish
repatriates from the USSR, I was chief of the CE Section. In addition, l'trained
several Police Inspectors and Spanish Army Officers in interrogation techniques.
Also, I was head of a five-man Spanish interrogation team.)
4. An interrogation center of the type I have in mind, after serious consideration
of the personnel, facilities and sources available to AMBUD, should put AMBUD on
the operational map, so to speak, and should also do credit to JMWAVE. This centerx
would not be in opposition to, or in competition with CAC, since the sources tapped
would be those they are not physically able to handle and the women who now are
under no one's jurisdiction for such matkaxxx purposes.
5. At your convenience I would like the opportunity to discuss this program
with you and to also talk about the requirements for passing to ANBUD.
Alice B. Capocong

