14-00000
104-10217-10184
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
WH/EA 65-35
MEMORANDUM FOR: Deputy Director for Plans
SUBJECT: Kloy GUTIERREZ Menoyo (ACSI SD 8831)
1. On 25 January 1965 WH/SA received an 8W message from
a resident asset who on behalf of two alleged members of an on-island
"faction of Alpha-66" was passing a plea for assistance to Subject.
Since Subject had for some years been a registered ACSI contact, a
WH/SA representative met with Captain Ted Carr, ACSI, on 25 January
to discuss the operational implications of the SW message.
2. The meeting resulted in a number of interesting disclosures,
the most important of which are cited below:
a) ACSI believed Subject to be in Cuba, though Captain
Carr declared that he did not know when or how Subject infil-
trated the island; where he was, how many men had accom-
panied him or what equipment or arms Subject had taken with
him.
b) ACSI has, in the past, had direct staff officer contact
with Subject but has never given him "significant" financial
assistance, or military or maritime materiel.
c) The activity under which Subject operated had been
coordinated (F/DC/15-63, 18 July 1963) and called basically
for the infiltration of Rafael HUGUET del Valle (SD 11070), to
make a contact with Second National Front of the Escambray
(SNFE) elements inside. Subject has long been the keyman in
SNFE. The mission: To locate, obtain and exfiltrate Treasure
Hunt items (military hardware). According to ACSI's plan,
Subject was to serve as "general coordinator for the activities".
(Note: A plan generally similar to this was submitted to and
presumably approved by the Special Group, date unknown.)
SECRET
201-269349
14-00000
SECRET
Captain Carr admitted that the operation as approved had not
taken place, and that a "new paper was being prepared" to
meet the changed circumstances. Present ACSI planning calls
for HUGUET to be infiltrated by Alpha-66 or SNFE facilities to
serve as Subject's communicator. Timing of the infiltration is
to be determined by Subject, unilaterally. Captain Carr believed
that Subject would activate HUGUET "almost any minute".
HUGUET has been trained by ACSI in two-way WT and SW and
will communicate with ACSI base Station, Miami. He has been
on a "retainer" for several months.
d) Captain Carr said that ACSI had no firm evidence
that Subject in fact had cells or nets of supporters in Cuba.
Further, no evidence that Subject could communicate with
supporters on the island by means other than commercial cable,
telephone or open code mail. ACSI does not control Subject's
communications, nor, apparently, does it monitor them.
3. In summary, Captain Carr averred that ACSI maintains at
most a loose, advisory tie to Subject and that even with respect to
HUGUET, ACSI's role was restricted to training and "minor" financial
support. Allegedly, HUGUET has been rigorously disciplined to
divulge his or Subject's plans to ACSI.
4. Some hours after the conclusion of the meeting with Captain
Carr, ACSI requested of FI/Liaison that an "urgent meeting" be held
on 27 January to discuss Subject and his operation. This meeting was
cancelled on the basis of an announcement by Havana Radio, on the
evening of 25 January, that Subject and two unidentified colleagues had
been arrested by the GOC in Oriente.
John L. Hart
Deputy Chief, WH (SA)
DDP/WH/SA/EDE:J. H. Sherwood:smp (26 January 1965)
Distribution:
Orig. and 1 - DDP
1 - DC/WH (SA)
1 - WH/SA/EDE
1 - WH/SA/ESC
SECRET

