14-00000
J
104-10172-10362
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
Addendun to the Study on the
Directorio Revolucionario Iberico de liberacion
(Iberian Revolutionary Directorate of Liberation)-DRIL
SECRET
.10ct. 1960.
14-00000
SEURET
2
1. ΠΡΑΣΙΝ
According to Juan, the aving spirit behind Wie Spanish aarchista
in France, the Fil (Federation of Iberian Ararchists) is not collaborating with
either the Commnists or the PIL
11. CLIA/BELDIUM/DREL R
A 23 July 196) roport stated that the Jeanish-Belgian Friendship Society
in Meigiva receives financial aid from thumberto Hodrigues TORU, Cuban Asbasay
in bedrid.
The President of the Society is Felix FERNANDEZ Santistoban, and its
Secretary is Eduardo TELL. Nohet.
It to interesting to note here that Aberrazan UULEY More requested, ia a
latter to "Che" GUEVARA, financial aid from the Caben Government and a reloste
of exile DRIL funde cor which General BAY had control. As a follow-up to this
letter Eloy CUTIPRIEZ moyo went to Liege, Belgium, to make a firsthand ostinate
of Dill leadership, capabilities, and potential, preliminary to the unfreesing of
any funds in We Hational Bank of Cuba. Later as a result of como interrogations
of DCL naabers approtended in Belgium, it was learned thes Fidel CAST has
agreed to reloase Large amounts of Spanish funds blocked in Cuba to support the
DRIL with the provision that CASTIR can be assured that the nature of this organi
sation is purely revolutionary and is dedicated to the overthrow of the Franco
Regine.
III. APRICA/DREL RELATIONSHIP
Maximo PENA and Lavier LASTRA, both [WIL nenbers, have taken the initiative
along with several Belgians sympathetic to the Spanish couse, of organising a group
called Liere-kemagne. A mooting of this organisation was held in the Hotel
Central, Liege, Belgium, on 2 September 1960. Addssion was by invitation only,
and several members of the CPA! (Conite Belge pour la Paix en Algerie, Belgian
Waadttee for Peace in Aloria) were present.
14-00000
SECRET
17. FITS
1. Sisto ariel A Chicat
Subject, a Catan, is the father of Juan Ramel QMA vores, a Cuban Embassy
employee L. Madrid. Subject is an attache at the Cuban Embassy, wadrid, and is
also a neubar of the Cubes organisation, EK (Departamento de investigacions del
Ejercito Revolucionarto). His principal mission in Spain is to give aid to the
CRIL.
2. Jose Antonio Tran
DOB: 25 Deccabor 1925 at Pasajes de San Pedro. Subject was arrested by the
Belgian police on & August 1960 in Liege, Belgium, as a sander of the bail. As of
19 August 1960, de was still being detained by the solice. The brother, Felix
nanotte traga, bar: 12 July 1930 at Pasajes de San Pedro, was likewise appre-
bonded. More have been farther details on Felix. Be, Innover, carried on his
person a list of names and adtressen of correspondouta in various countries which
the Belgian police conflaceted.
3. Arturo 0.72ALL ata Lledon
DOBs 25 hay 1526 in Cana de Langreo, Orzedo, Spain. Subject prepared two
suitcase bombs which were sent by rail on the Eadrid-Barcelona train, and which
exploded on the wall car on 27 June 1960. He, then, is believed to have fled to
France or Belgium. After his arreat by the Belgian police, along with other Dail
members, on 6 August 1960, he was interrogated and reportedly put across the Dutch
border by the Belgians on 18 August 1960; however, there has been no evidence that
he over entored Rolland.
4. Moy GITISSEZ παγοι
Subjeat was dues la Spain and carlig te Cuban evolution fought in the
Sacanbray Bountains. is a leader from Aiba, Jubject, on 16 July 1960, vaa
lodged at the Cutan äutesy in badrid. At What Woo, he was ea rate to Paris,
SECRET
14-00000
SECRET
France. the trip to the European contineat was calccted sith all mitere. In
Liege, Belgica, he was arrested on 6 August 1960, and interrogated. ise was then
purportedly expelled Tos Delgium as of 17 August and returned to Cabe. A later
roport, however, stated that he doparted by place for Parts on 12 August 1960.
5. Hayos IN Foroas
Subject has been identified as the instigator of the bombings which took
place in San Sebastian, 3rain, in late June or early July, 1960. De stated that
further acts of terrorisa were to be consitied in late July. Fron mid-July to
early August, he was in Toulouse, Prar.ce. On 6 August 1960, wakili was apprehended
along with other RL meabers by the Belgian police in lege, Dalglum. He was
cearched, questioned, and re ortedly sunt across the Dutch border on 10 August 1960.
There has been, however, no evidence that actther he nor his compatriot, Arturo
CORSA
Hata ledo, are currently in Holland, or in fact ever entered the Dutch
territory.
6. Maximo ETA Osaless
official)
DOB: 7 April 1923 at Villaneuva, Spain. He lives at 324 lice St. Laurent,
Liege, Belgium, and is a member of AREL (Agrupacion Meublicana Espanola de Liega),
an anti-Franco group which is dominated by Communists and Socialists. According
24
to a Spanish service official Jubject is an architect by profession and is in
charge of the political and diplomatic matters for the DFIL; but he has been identi-
fied by others as the accountant and financial manager of the ML in Mage..
7. Karl Abderraman MULI HT6, at Nenucl
DOB: 23 October 192) in Darcelona, Spain. Subject solicited fimucial aid
fron Cube and other Latin American countries, siccically, argentina and Vonsavela,
for oontinued Bil terrorist activity in Spain in a letter to "One GUEVARA, hoed
of the Cuban Katioral Bank. Is also requested that O AVARA or Raul Cath ontact
General Alberto BAYO O'raud in an effort to catioe him into giving support to the
SECRET
14-00000
asa ca leader. De likoutso claired that the two fortigere, Parrando
Cares and Alberto Alesandrino dos, were both agetetle keurd
theende omallara Angola to be another easy frent". Dos AT-3 s
reportedly arpadsing a chipaunt of Yugoslav ares to go to Fortugueso Africa
Don Tangier. R ees one of the arrestees of the Boigian.police in At 1960.
As of 19 August he was still being dotated by the polion.
8. Rafael Varia Muig
-
2:31 29 October 1920 in Madrid, Spain. He is a citizen of Venesuela. Be
was arrested by the Belgian polico in Loge sa a DRIL seaber in early August 1960
and as of 19 August was still being detained by the police. When he was searched
and Laterrogated, the following was found to be in his possessions
(1) A sabotage wannal prepared by General Alberto PATO
(2) A delayed action incendiary davice
(3) Miscellaneous correspondence
() Financial records and other documents

