1000000
104-10331-10349
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JUN-26-1997 08:20
JFK TASK FORCE
202 324 3409
2
Mr. David G. Marwell
details the facts relating to records already processed under the Freedom of Information and
Privacy Acts (FOIPA) and the commitment of the FBI to provide the records to the public.
FBI CORE FILES AND ASSASSINATION RELATED FILES
Enclosure C contains the list of subjects and a summary of the files collected and
identified in 1992 as the John F. Kennedy (JFK) Assassination Core Files and Related Files as
prepared for Director Sessions' statement. The summary was presented to Congress as an
explanation of the pages processed under the FOIPA and available to the public in the FBIHQ's
FOIPA Reading Room. Research about how the universe of files known as "Core and Related,"
were grouped and titled did not produce a precise definition. A review of tickler notes related to
the FOIPA requests suggests that the group of files identified as "Core" was collected to respond
to FOIPA requests received in 1976 for files on the assassination. The group of files known as
"Related" seemed to have been established due to additional FOIPA requests and appeals for files
associated with the assassination. The John F. Kennedy Task Force (JFKTF) could not find any
documentation when the term of "Core and Related" was initiated.
FBI RECORDS SYSTEM
The FBI currently maintains seventeen record systems. The Privacy Act requires
that every type of record system used by a govemment agency be disclosed to the public. The
following is the list of records explained in the Federal Register (Enclosure D).
001. The National Crime Information Center (NCIC).
002. Central Records System (CRS).
003. The Bureau Mailing Lists.
004. Routine Correspondence Handled by Preprinted Form.
005. Routine Correspondence Prepared Without File
Yellow.
006. Electronic Surveillance Indices (ELSUR).
007. The FBI Automated Payroll System.
008. The Bureau Personnel Management System (BPMS).
009. The Fingerprint Identification Records System (FIRS).
010. Employee Travel Vouchers and Individual Earning Records.
011. Employee Health Records.
012. Time Utilization Record-Keeping System (TURK).
013. Security Access Control System (SACS).
014. FBI Alcoholism Program.
015. National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime (NCAVC).
016. FBI Counterdrug Information Indices System (CIIS).
017. National DNA Index System (NDIS).
2
P.03/08
13-00000
JUN-26-1997 08:21
JFK TASK FORCE
202 324 3409 P.04/08
Mr. David G. Marwell
Ten of the above record systems do not concern the investigative area. The five
record systems of an investigative nature, but not relevant to the assassination, are 001(NCIC),
009 (FIRS), 015 (NCAVC), 016 (CIIS), and 017 (NDIS). Information from these records
systems is retrievable through index searches of each respective system. The JFKTF did not
search the indices of these systems, since they were not applicable at the time of the assassination
or the related investigations. In addition, record systems 003 through 005, 007, 008, and 010
through 014 were not relevant to the Act since they are internal FBI systems such as the payroll,
the handling of Bureau mail, health records, and other noninvestigative administrative matters
involving Bureau employees. The two systems of records relevant to the Act and searched by the
FBI were 002 Central Records' System (CRS) and 006 Electronic Surveillance Indices (ELSUR).
The following information will explain the FBI's system of recording, filing, and
retrieving documents at the FBI. The FBI's primary records repository is its CRS, which was
automated beginning in 1978. The old manual card index of the CRS was maintained, since the
automation did not encompass all of the old records. The FBI maintains the CRS for its
investigative, personnel, applicant, administrative, and general files. Although the FBI has other
record systems as explained above, the CRS is the primary and most important system for
retrieving assassination related records. It consists of a numerical sequence index of subject
matter files and an alphabetical index to these files called the general index.
The FBI's filing system follows a numbering method used to show (1) the
classification or type of investigative violation or administrative area involved, (2) the individual
case file within the category, and (3) the serialization of individual documents commonly called,
pieces of mail, in the file. Once a violation defines the classification, then the case portion of the
file number is assigned by subject. For instance, the number 91-200-20 on a piece of mail says it
is the 20th piece of mail in the 200th case file assigned to the bank robbery 91 classification.
This example would not be correct for the newest segment of files in the automated indices, the
Universal Case File (UCF) which was established in November 1991. However, the FBI's JFK
collection of files and docuraents known at this point do not fall within the UCF system.
Each classification maintains a zero (0) and a double zero (00) file. The 0 and 00
files are "general files" and precede the first case file in each classification. The O file is used for
complaints and miscellaneous nonspecific data relating to the classification that does not warrant
establishing a separate case file. The 00 file is used for collecting, in one place, policies and
procedures that refer to the particular classification or violation category. The FBI files each
document conceming policy and procedure serially in the 00 file of the appropriate classification.
Therefore, every time a change in policy, procedure, instruction, or guideline occurs; it is
documented in this category, with the information being placed in the 00 file.
The FBI's indexing of the CRS general indices falls into two separate categories,
"Main" and "Cross" references. A Main index reference carries the name of an individual,
organization, activity, or the like which is the primary subject of the file maintained in the
3
13-00000
JUN-26-1997 08:21
JFK TASK FORCE
202 324 3409
۲.05/08
D
Mr. David G. Marwell
system. All the documents created for a subject involving a particular violation will be filed in
that particular subject's main file. A Cross index reference contains only a mention or reference
to a particular individual, organization, activity, or the like found in the body of a document in a
file on another main subject. The case agent or records specialist indexes the cross reference, so
the information can be found later when it may be significant.
The FBI also maintains the ELSUR Index that contains the names of persons
whose voices have been monitored through an FBI microphone installation or a telephone
surveillance. This index consists of three categories of information: Principals (Targets) of an
electronic surveillance; Proprietary Interests; and Overhears. The FBI initiated the ELSUR index
at the recommendation of the Department of Justice. The index covers the electronic surveillance
sought by or conducted by the FBI since January 1, 1960. This index was automated in October
1991. Unlike the CRS, the FBI automated the entire indices, so only one search is necessary.
For the FBI to ensure that all the documents mandated by the Act were found, the
JFKTF requested those specifically trained in the record systems to conduct searches of both the
automated and manual CRS indices and the automated ELSUR index. The search included all
the core and related subjects as defined in Enclosure C. The searches were conducted at FBIHQ
and in the Field and Legat Offices. The FBI record specialists assigned to this task employed the
normal procedures for searching all the relevant indices to respond to the Act. Their appropriate
supervisors approved the work.
The House Select Committee on Assassination (HSCA) was a Congressional
Committee established to review possible theories of the assassinations concerning President
John F. Kennedy and the Reverend Martin Luther King. The JFKTF identified the universe of
files known as the "HSCA Files" by reviewing the HSCA request letters, the FBI response letters,
administrative folders and copies of the files shown to the HSCA staff. The copies of the HSCA
files and folders were segregated at the end of the Committee's investigation due to an agreement
with the Committee. The JFKTF identified the HSCA Field Office ELSUR documents
concerning the requested subjects by using the same records previously mentioned.
Concerning the Board's requests involving "JUNE MAIL," "Do Not File"
memoranda, "informant files," "personnel files" and "COINTELPRO activities," the information
in those categories, if maintained as records, are indexed and filed in the CRS. Therefore, the
universe of assassination records searched for and collected would include any documents with
the above notations. At FBIHQ, sensitive records requiring restricted access are maintained in
the Special File Room (SFR) which is a repository for sensitive records. In the Field Offices the
sensitive documents are also maintained in special areas, such as the SAC's Safe. All
assassination related records that the FBI maintains in the secure areas are also retrievable
through the systems searched. The FBI used these systems to search all areas for indexed and
retrievable records.
4
13-00000
JUN-26-1997 08:22
JFK TASK FORCE
202 324 3409 P.06/08
Mr. David G. Marwell
FBI RECORDS STORAGE FACILITIES
For storage of records outside FBI space, the FBI Headquarters uses two off-site
facilities. One location is Pickett Street in Alexandria, Virginia. This facility contains most of
the FBI's closed files that were previously housed at FBIHQ at 10th and Pennsylvania Avenue,
Washington, D.C. The other off-site facility is in Boyers, Pennsylvania. This location houses
FBI Legat information. The Legat information at Boyers, is also on "Microfilm" at FBIHQ. The
only additional records maintained at the Boyer's location consist of National Lawyers Guild files
that are "Court Sealed" records. The Boyers, Pennsylvania records' storage area is rented by the
FBI from the National Underground Storage Company.
In addition, the field offices have three official off cite storage facilities. These
facilities are located at Butte, Montana; Pocatello, Idaho; and San Juan, Puerto Rico. All three
locations have archival disposition offices to decide the handling of closed files, but all decisions
are forwarded to FBIHQ's archival office for final approval. All FBI Field Offices and FBI
Legats send information requiring "record-keeping" to FBIHQ.
FBI RELEASES TO
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION (NARA)
Enclosure E depicts all releases made to NARA from the first release on
December 13, 1993, to the 16th release on December 20, 1996. A special note is made that the
total number of pages since 1992 has expanded from 236,000 pages to more than 666,000 pages
made available to the public. This includes the re-processing of all core and related files
according to the Act. The FBI has developed a plan with the Board's staff to streamline this
process. The change will cause an initial delay for the next release, but eventually the releases
will occur more often and with fewer postponements.
FBI RESPONSES TO SPECIFIC REQUESTS
Throughout the process of responding to the Board's specific numbered requests
the JFKTF staff is in frequent contact with employees of the Board. The Board has also
requested information from our records concerning other areas that may have some relation to the
assassination. The memoranda from the Board to the FBI indicate that the FBI has addressed
both written and oral requests from the Board. Where there are no specific written responses
from the FBI to the Board, the FBI either handled these responses orally with members of the
staff or is in the process of responding. The JFKTF prepared an inventory of the requests and
status of responses and shared this information with the Board. However, the responses to the
numbered letter requests will be documented later.
1
5
13-00000
SECRET
From the Desk of Michele I. Platte
filo
(complete)
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Eileen M. Wukitch @ DO
Lee E. Carle-Y @ DO
Michele 1. Platte
12/10/96 11:42:33
Trace Request: Mikhail Ivanovich Samarin
CL BY: 2151521
CL REASON: 1.5(a)
DECL ON: X1
DRV FROM: HUM 1-82
The Directorate of Operations surfaced no additional information to that already known to the FBI.
Mikhail Ivanovich Samarin died (approximately) 06 June 1966.
Any questions concerning this request please call me on 43840. Thanks, Michele.
CC:
Andrew J. Trusko @ DO
Per phone all to FBI (DB) Ν. Ο βλεCTION,
11 Dec 96
to Release
0
SECRET
13-00000
CONFIDENTIAL
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Andrew J. Trusko @ DO
Fredrick C. Wickham
12/03/96 17:29:27
name trace
CL BY: 524343
CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1
DRV FROM: COV 1-82
I need a trace for the JFK folks of Mikhail Ivanovich Samarin. He was a Soviet defector borm in
Moscow Jan 21, 1908 and defected in 1948. Worked at Army Language Facility until 1951? The
request came from the FBI and they want to know if he is alive and if we care if his name is
released. I don't know what more we know about him if anything to answer the question. He did
become ill in 1951 and was put inot a sanitarium so I doubt he is alive but? If you find anything
pertinent you can send it to Eileen Wukitch and Lee Carle if I'm not here tomorrow. Thanks.
CC:
Kenneth R. Johnson @ DO, Eileen M. Wukitch @ DO, Lee E. Carle-Y @ DO
CONFIDENTIAL
13-00000
T
4
☆
☆☆☆
☆☆☆☆
RAL
& WORRAL OF INT
Page 1 of 2 pages
Office of the Legal Attache
American Embassy
Bern, Switzerland
Fax No. 41/31/357-73-68
(International)
031/357-73-68 (Domestic)
Telephone Number:
031/357-73-40
To:
FAX NUMBER:
ATTN:
FBIHQ
001-202-324-22-99
SC John Hartingh
1
FROM:
ORIGINATOR:
SUBJECT:
JFK Assassination Review Board
LEGAL ATTACHE, BERN
Regina Superneau
OUR REF:
Date:
20 September 1995
COMMENTS/MESSAGE: Here is a copy given to me by Polt of the
statement of the DOS's position which was presented to Swiss
yesterday.
Let me know if you have any thoughts on this.
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION ΤΟ
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
:
13-00000
ASSASSINATION RECORDS
CONGRESS CREATED THE ASSASSINATION RECORDS REVIEW BOARD
AND THE PRESIDENT APPOINTED ITS MEMBERS IN RESPONSE TO
WIDESPREAD PUBLIC INTEREST IN THE FACTS SURROUNDING THE
KENNEDY ASSASSINATION
--
THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION ACT OF 1992
MANDATES THAT ALL GOVERNMENT RECORDS RELATED TO THE
ASSASSINATION, ΤΟ THE GREATEST EXTENT POSSIBLE, SHOULD BE
MADE AVAILABLE TO THE AMERICAN PUBLIC.
WE SUPPORT THE BOARD AND ARE GIVING IT OUR FULL
COOPERATION IN ITS EFFORTS TO CARRY OUT ITS MANDATE.
--
IN THIS SPIRIT, WE ASK YOUR COOPERATION IN MAKING ALL
RELEVANT DOCUMENTARY MATERIAL AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.
-- FROM THE U.S. PERSPECTIVE, WE SEE NO REASON FOR THE
CONTINUED CLASSIFICATION OF THE MATERIAL THE BOARD HAS
REQUESTED.
i
13-00000
FBIMTG#1.TXT
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
Notes from meeting with FBI
Assassination Review Board staffer for FBI Phil Goldrick
Grant's Secure Fax:
202-324-3326
:
Grant wants copy of released 1967 IG Report for his reviwers
Names of FBI contact reviewers: Carl Valentine
Mike McCaffrey
Bob Lill (?)
Dick Busching
Re issue with Board over protection of sources/informates:
"Protection forever"/not sure how board with respond
Re privacy:
als
hose
JFK
!
Board is supportive of protecting privacy of individu
not directly involved in assassination story (especially t
whose roles were incidential or circumstantial)
Re data base issues: Does not currently have capability to search
database will have once new hard drive installed;
Does not see an FOIA problem; reminded me that they are no
t
keeping their collection
Page 1
everything to NARA
13-00000
ICY FOR BAKKE, & Gary
JOHN P. HAS ORIGINAL
FBI INFORMANT/CONFIDENTIALITY POSTPONEMENTS
INTRODUCTION
This document will address the postponement practices
of the FBI relating to informants and others with whom the FBI
has a confidential relationship (informant/confidentiality
postponements) in documents being transferred to the National
Archives and Records Administration (NARA) under the "President
John F. Kennedy Assassination Records Collection Act of 1992"
(the Act). To provide a basis for the formulation of these
practices, their description will be preceded by a discussion of
the classes of persons protected by an understanding of
confidentiality, as well as the development, operation,
protection, and investigative significance of such persons.
Other determinations underlying these practices will also be
addressed. The information contained in this document is based
not only on the experience of the FBI and law enforcement and
intelligence communities in general, but on the personal.
investigative experiences of some of the contributors to it.
CLASSES OF CONFIDENTIAL RELATIONSHIPS
The FBI maintains a confidential relationship with
several types of persons. They include:
1. Criminal Informants who provide information
regarding criminal activity, including organized crime, white
collar crime, violent crime, drug trafficking, and, today,
domestic terrorism. All such individuals are now assigned
identifying symbol numbers (to be described hereafter) to protect
their identities in documents containing information they have
provided. However, before and at the time of the Assassination,
and for some years thereafter, the names of the persons under
development as informants (Potential Criminal Informants or PCIS)
were reflected in documents until their reliability could be
established and they were converted to Criminal Informant (CI)
status. Upon conversion to CI status the informant was assigned
an identifying symbol number for protection.
There are a number of subgroups within the criminal
informant program. While some CIs are considered general
criminal informants, others are categorized according to the
specialized area in which they provide information. These would
include, for example, Organized Crime (OC) informants, who
provide information primarily regarding subjects involved in
organized crime activity, and Top Echelon informants (TE), who
provide information regarding the highest levels of organized
crime.
From the time a person comes under development as an
informant (in previous years as a PCI), he or she is made the
subject of an individual file. This file contains information
CIA SPECIAL COLLECHOND
RELEASE IN FULL
13-00000
provided by the person, as well as administrative and background
data regarding the source.
2. National Security Informants who today provide
foreign counterintelligence and international terrorism
information, and, in years past, also included those informants
who provided information regarding domestic security/terrorism.
Such informants are now referred to as assets, but at the time of
the Assassination and for some years thereafter were labelled
Security Informants (SIS). Like criminal informants, assets are
provided identifying symbol numbers for protection, as were SIS.
before them. Persons under development as SIs were considered
Potential Security Informants (PSIS) and, as with PCIs, their
true identities were reflected in documents until they were
converted to symbol-number status.
The FBI operates various types of National Security
assets. They include:
Double Agents. A double agent is one who receives
assignments from, cooperates with, and/or performs tasks for a
foreign intelligence service on a clandestine basis but who, in
actuality, operates in this capacity under the control of the
U.S. Government.
Defector Sources. A defector source is an individual
who possesses intelligence information of value and has either
openly or without announcement left the employment of his or her
country and is furnishing information to the U.S. Government.
Recruitments in Place (RIP). A RIP is an_individual--
from a foreign country who covertly provides information of
intelligence value to the U.S. Government while outwardly
maintaining allegiance to his or her own government.
While under development as PSIS, SIS (like PCIs) were
made the subject of individual files which contain information
provided as well as administrative data and background
information. Today, an individual becomes the subject of a file
at the outset of his or her development as an asset.
3. It should be noted that in recent years the FBI has
designated Cooperating Witnesses (CWs) as constituting another
class of source. A CW is defined as an individual whose
relationship with the Government is concealed until testimony is
required at trial and who, on a continuing basis and under the
direction of an Agent, contributes substantial operational
assistance to the resolution and/or direction of a case through
active participation in the investigation. CWs are unlike
informants, who gather intelligence and will not testify.
Although CWs are aware from the outset that it is likely that
they may be required to publicly admit their cooperation with law
2
13-00000
enforcement, the FBI has taken the position that, in the absence
of public testimony, the relationship with a CW is similar to the
relationship with any other source. That is to say, if for any
reason the CW is never publicly exposed in trial, the
relationship remains confidential. In addition, the
intelligence, as opposed to operational assistance, furnished by
a CW also is protected, along with the confidential relationship
as it relates to such information.
4. Sources given expressed promises of confidentiality
in connection with the information they provided in the course of
criminal, counterintelligence, and background investigations.
Oftentimes, when associates or neighbors, as well as persons in
businesses, public utilities, government agencies, and elsewhere
are contacted in the course of an investigation, they agree to
provide information only if they are assured that their
identities will be protected under a promise of confidentiality.
Where such a promise is given, documents containing such
information will contain the name of the person providing the
information as well as language specifically setting forth the
fact that confidentiality was requested. No file is opened on
such persons and no symbol numbers are assigned to protect their
identities. Furthermore, unlike informants, little background
information other than an address or perhaps the name of an
employer is set forth for these sources in FBI files.
5. Persons providing information requiring that
confidentiality be afforded its source. In certain instances in
the past (to include the time of the Assassination), the FBI
received information from persons in financial institutions,
public utilities, and other similar entities that would not have
been publicly available. In fact, today, a subpoena would be
required to obtain bank records, telephone toll records, and
other like materials provided by such persons. These persons
generally provided such information on a regular basis.
Regardless of the frequency with which they provided information,
they would have done so only with the understanding that they
were doing so on a confidential basis, even where that
understanding is not specifically articulated in FBI documents.
Additionally, much of the information necessary for the FBI to
successfully carry out its investigative function comes from
private citizens that are either approached by the FBI for
questioning or who voluntarily come forward. Before the passage
of provisions of the Freedom of Information/Privacy Act in the
mid-1970s allowing access to FBI investigative files, it can be
stated with virtual certainty that no person providing such
information would have anticipated his or her cooperation ever
being made public. In fact, prior to the passage of the Privacy
Act of 1974, all FBI investigative information, including that
obtained from informants and sources, was confidential by
Department of Justice Order. After passage of the Privacy Act,
an expressed grant of confidentiality was required in order to
3
13-00000
to balance the risk of harm to the person or to the informant
program in these judgement calls. (see Tab 6)
5. The most difficult category of sources to deal with
is that of persons providing information to the FBI without a
specific request for confidentiality. In the attempt to release
as much material as possible, the identities of most of these
sources were released, but, once again, the FBI has attempted to
balance the need to maximize released information with the
potential harm to the individual source. (see Tab 7)
6. The "Mosaic Theory" is of particular importance with
regard to the transfer of FBI files to NARA under the terms of
the Act. The FBI has maximized the release of information
maintained in the Assassination files in order to comply with
both the letter and the spirit of the Act, and this has resulted
in an unprecedented amount of informant information being made
available to the public. However, the FBI has postponed
informant symbol numbers wherever that informant is providing
positive information, under the terms of the Act which allow for
the postponement of the identity of informants. The release of
these symbol numbers, in combination with the information already
released, could very well lead to the identification of a number
of FBI informants.
The FBI is currently reviewing for transfer the
material which was provided to the HSCA in 1978. With respect to
the HSCA files, the Task Force has been more protective of all
types of sources, but particularly organized crime and national
security informants, due to the real danger of retaliation
against them, even after these many years. The informants and
other sources utilized in these investigations were specifically
targeted against subjects of investigative interest, and it is
not readily apparent how they might figure in a conspiracy to
assassinate JFK. Anticipating the opportunity to discuss these
concerns with the ARRB, the balancing test for the HSCA files, at
the present, has been necessarily weighted in favor of
postponement of any information which might tend to identify a
source. Of course, if any information is located in these files
which bears, even indirectly, on the assassination, that
information will be considered under the most liberal light
possible.
BASIS FOR INFORMANT/CONFIDENTIALITY POSTPONEMENT PRACTICES
Again, the FBI has attempted to postpone the release of
information only where there are compelling reasons to do so.
There are no more compelling reasons for postponement than those
underlying the protection being given informants and others with
whom the FBI has confidential relationships. The rationale for
postponement in this area is clear from the discussion of
10
13-00000
informants, assets, and other confidential sources set forth
above.
The privilege available to the government to withhold
the identity of persons who furnish information to officers
charged with law enforcement is well established in the law. The
rationale for the informant privilege has been explained as
follows:
1
[I]t has been the experience of law enforcement
officers that the prospective informer will usually
condition his cooperation on an assurance of anonymity,
fearing that if disclosure is made, physical harm or
other undesirable consequences may be visited upon him
or his family. By withholding the identity of the
informer, the government profits in that the continued
value of informants placed in strategic positions is
protected, and other persons are encouraged to
participate in the administration of justice.
i.
United States v. Tucker, 380 F.2d 206, 213 (2d Cir. 1967); accord
In re United States, 565 F.2d 19 (2d Cir. 1977), cert. denied sub
nom, Bell v. Socialist Workers Party, 436 U.S. 962 (1978)
To reduce the length of the body of this document,
further discussion of the privilege is not set forth here but is
contained in the appendices. (see Tab 8)
The FBI and the Department of Justice have gone to
great lengths in the past to protect the identity of informants.
Prosecutions have been dropped rather than divulge an informant
identity, a former Attorney General (Griffin Bell) risked being
held in contempt of court rather than identify informants in a
civil suit, and the FBI has often had to weather the
protestations of other agencies which were given information
derived from sources but which, despite their considerable
insistence, were not informed of the identity of these sources.
The FBI believes that its informant/confidentiality
practices are consistent with the postponement provisions of the
Act. The practice is clearly consistent with the language of
Section 6 (subsection 4) of the Act that permits the postponement
of relationships currently requiring protection when public
disclosure would be so harmful that it outweighs the public
interest. That is because unless a confidential relationship has
already been disclosed, and regardless of whether the source is
active or even still living, the relationship must remain
confidential for the protection of the source and/or his or her
family, as well as to sustain the viability of the FBI's source
development efforts.
Again considering the balancing test under which an
agency must show that the need to protect certain information
11
13-00000
Through postponement outweighs the public interest in the
information proposed for postponement, the FBI believes there can
be little or no historical interest in the identity of someone
who did not provide positive information, a situation that occurs
frequently in the "core" files. At the same time, the damage to
individuals and the FBI's source development efforts resulting
from disclosure would be great.
Where there is positive information attributed to a
source whose identity is being postponed, the result of applying
the balancing test is virtually the same as that where the
contact was negative. The information provided by the source,
which is being disclosed, is of significantly greater public
interest than the source's identity, which is being postponed.
Disclosure of the source's identity accomplishes little in terms
of satisfying the public interest when compared, again to the
potential harm to the source and/or his or her family, as well as
the FBI's source development capabilities. In' a number of
instances, the source of positive information is referred to not
by name, but by symbol number. There would appear to be little
if any public interest in such an identifier except, perhaps, on
the part of persons attempting to apply the Mosaic approach
simply to determine the identities of informants or assets.
While the FBI does not directly rely on those grounds
for postponement centered on the unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy in regard to informant/confidentiality postponements,
such privacy concerns are also a part of the FBI's rationale for
its informant/confidentiality practices. Exposing a source
and/or his or her family to any of the various forms of
retaliation that might result from a disclosure of the source's
identity would constitute, at the very least, an unwarranted
invasion of personal privacy.
CONCLUSION
Criminal informants and National Security informants
(assets) are, respectively, absolutely indispensable resources in
the effort to maintain public safety and to protect the national
security. It would not be possible to have effective law
enforcement without informants, as well as ordinary citizens, who
are willing to provide information on a confidential basis, nor
would it be possible to maintain the security of this nation
without the cooperation of assets and other sources. In turn,
without the ability to honor the obligation to maintain the
confidentiality that is central to the relationship that must
exist with informants, assets, and other sources, there would be
a chilling effect that could irreparably debilitate efforts to
obtain the critical assistance needed from such persons if law
enforcement and national security missions are to be effectively
carried out. Furthermore, the obligation to protect the
12
}
13-00000
confidential relationship with informants and other sources is
one that must attach in perpetuity, not just because of the need
to protect the source and the source's family as promised, but so
that those that might serve as sources in the future are not
deterred from doing so because of a justifiable fear of
disclosure and the ensuing risk of harm to themselves and their
families.
Again, in its effort to maximize disclosure under the
Act, the FBI carefully examined every situation in which it
contemplated postponement of information and, more especially,
any type of information (e.g. the identities of or information
tending to identify informants or other confidential sources)
that appears widely throughout the JFK documents. In doing so,
the FBI made the inescapable determination that it must
absolutely protect the identities of informants and others with
whom a confidential relationship exists. The FBI believes that
doing so is consistent with the postponement provisions of the
Act.
13
13-00000
U.S. Department of Justice
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Washington, D. C. 20535
May 14, 1993
HISTORICAL REVIEW GROUP
CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF INTELLIGENCE
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
336 AMES BUILDING
WASHINGTON, D. C. 20505
ATTENTION: J. BARRY HARRELSON
DEAR BARRY:
i
ATTACHED ARE SEPARATE INVENTORY SHEETS REFLECTING
INCOMING AND OUTGOING CIA DOCUMENTS FOR EACH FILE THAT HAVE BEEN
INVENTORIED INTO OUR COMPUTER.
IF YOU NEED VERIFICATION OF ANY OF THE ENTRIES, LET ME
KNOW.
ENCLOSURES
THANKS,
July
JUDY BOWEN
JFK TASK FORCE
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT
13-00000
CIA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000>
any ey
5 May 1994
MEMORANDUM FOR:
Mrs. Margaret Cook
Team, Captain
Document Classification Unit
FOIA/Privacy Act Section
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FROM:
SUBJECT:
Mr. Barry Harrelson
Project Leader
Historical Review Group
History Staff
Central Intelligence Agency
Use of CIA Desigantor
"CLIP"
i
1. This is in response to your request for written
guidance concerning the proper classificaton of the Agency's
designator "Clip."
-
2. We have reviewed this question with the the head of
the Directorate of Operations team working with this office
on the JFK collection. The advice provided is that the
"Clip" may be treated as unclassified in all instances.
3. If you have any further questions in this regard,
please call me.
Barry Harrelson
13-00000
SECRET
25 June 1993
JFK Assassination File Review
SUBJECT:
Review of FBI Materials
1.
Crypts to be coordinated with FBI:
FEDORA
SHAMROCK
VIADUCT
If during DO review or redaction review you find these....
crypts unredacted make a copy for Barry to coordinate with
the FBI.
i
2. Some numbers in the FBI 100 series (100-#####) are
classified. If a FBI 100 number is referenced on a CIA
document it must be coordinated with the FBI. 'If there is
only the number (no substantive information