14-00000
104-10227-10143
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
19 October 1951
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT : Meeting in Mr. Coorr's office, 1100-1230, 13 Oct 61
PARTICIPANTS: Messrs. Coerr, Wollam, Hurwitch, Whedbee,
Colonel Johnson
1. Colonel Johnson gave a full account of his two meetings with
Dr. MIRO in Miami on 5 and 6 October, following in detail the Memo-
randa for the Record prepared by Colonel Johnson of these meetings.
He also outlined the items Paula had given Dean as the budget for 1961
on the basis of their receiving $100, 000 for that month. That outline,
it was remarked, appears to be largely the same as the old FRD budget.
All present felt that this budget appeared to be well-padded and largely
for salaries. It was remarked by Colonel Johnson that there seemed
to be a very good possibility that some of those on the salary list may
also be receiving support from HEW. Colonel Johnson remarked that
he would be seeing Dr. MIRO on Monday, 16 October, at which time
he expects to clarify some of the budget matters and also to get from
CIA's Miami station some more details from Mr. Paula.
2. Mr. Coerr raised the question of what was the cover to be
used by Colonel Johnson in his contacts with Dr. MIRO. Colonel Johnson
said that the cover question had not yet been resolved, that it was
questionable how long any cover would hold up, particularly with the
press, that the cover of public relations consultant, the cover of a
research man or teacher in Miami, and various other possibilities were
under consideration. Mr. Coerr commented that the astute press rep-
resentatives might soon learn the identity of the CIA representative
with MIRO, particularly if opposition leaders like PRIO, who, he re-
marked, already seems to know, should become angry and report in
the press what they know. Mr. Hurwitch stated that MIRC had told him
that PRIO, or a representative of PRIO, had said to MIRC, "I under-
stand that you have a Colonel Johnson as your representative with the
U. S. Government." MIRO also declared to Mr. Hurwitch that only
he, MIRO, and his secretary, ARAGON, had reason to know of
Colonel Johnson's role. There was some speculation on how PRIO had
learned of the matter.
SECRET
3. Mr. Whedbee said that there was need to clarify just who
Colonel Johnson represented to Dr. MIRO, that MIRO had been told
he would have a representative who would have frequent contact with
Mr. Goodwin in the White House and Mr. Woodward and others at
the Department of State and would also be in contact with the Agency,
and that it was accordingly the understanding of the Agency that
Colonel Johnson would therefore represent or be the link between
Dr. MIRO and the U. S. Government, at least in the Miami area.
He remarked that this certainly had some bearing on the cover matter
and its security aspects. Mr. Coerr remarked that it seemed
Colonel Johnson was simply an overt representative of the Agency.
Mr. Whedbee remarked that this was hardly possible and still have
any security or deniability. If he was overt, he was automatically
a representative of the U. S. Government. Mr. Hurwitch interposed
that he considered Colonel Johnson to be solely the representative of
the Agency. He said that Mr. Goodwin had said that he, Goodwin,
only wanted to be consulted on the most important issues and that MIRO's
normal contact in Washington for policy guidance should be with the
Cuban desk in the Department of State. In Miami, Colonel Johnson
would then work out with MIRO the Agency support of these policies.
4. Mr. Hurwitch continued, expressing his view that
Colonel Johnson should have the authority from the Agency to discuss
and approve Dr. MIRO's operational plans such as tours to Latin
America, support of internal groups and the like and, if certain plans
were approved by them, to sit down with MIRO, the military advisors
and representatives of the internal groups, and work out final details
for actually running operations in support of these elements.
Mr. Whedbee countered, "It is by no means as simple as that. This
is a lot more complicated than just having two or a dozen people sit
down in Miami and agree on something. Take, for instance, the
simple matter, relatively speaking, of sending to Latin America a
person on a speaking tour. Did you know that the Immigration and
Naturalization Service and the FBI require all requests for support
from them to be sent back here to Washington and then their people
in Miami have to be instructed by their Headquarters here in Washing-
ton to facilitate such travel, thus, in effect, the final control on travel
is up here in Washington and it doesn't even reside in the Agency.
Each individual has to be so handled." Mr. Hurwitch said he thought
that this could be worked out so that it could be done entirely locally
in Miami. Mr. Whedbee expressed some doubt and said that somehow
SECRET
he had the impression that MIRO had little assets but thought that
if he could acquire all the facilities of CIA as a government entity
placed at his disposal, he could do something. Of course these
facilities and the authority of CIA simply could not be turned over to
Dr. MIRO.
5. Colonel Johnson said that he felt there was a considerable
area in which we could support Dr. MIRO and he referred to the
State Department's propaganda plan, "Operacion Grieta," which
Dr. MIRO said he had received during his visit to Mr. Hurwitch and
Mr. Morales Carrion. Mr. Hurwitch explained that this was in no
sense a Department of State plan but rather a suggested draft by
Morales Carrion and passed to MIRO as merely an indication of the
sort of propaganda operation in Latin America that might be effective.
6. On the subject of propaganda and the activities of the
"collateral groups" like the FORD, the DRE, etc. outside the CRC,
both Mr. Wollam and Mr. Hurwitch said they believed it would be
possible to transfer these groups and their activities in their entirety
to Dr. MIRO in accordance with his desires. Mr. Whedbee said
he sympathized with MIRO's position but doubted that it would work.
Mr. Hurwitch said that if we had some doubts on this matter, he won-
dered why these doubts had not been brought up by Mr. Bissell in the
discussions with Mr. Goodwin. Mr. Hurwitch then claimed he had a
Goodwin memo saying the DRE, FORD, and all internal groups must
be financed through MIRO. Mr. Hurwitch wondered when this new
position had developed in the Agency. Mr. Whedbee stated that the
Agency had had long experience during the past two years in dealing
with the various Cuban elements both in and outside Cuba, and that
these types of problems had existed from the beginning and although
they may seem new to Mr. Hurwitch and Mr. Wollam, who had recently
come on the desk, they certainly were not new to Mr. Coerr, who
readily agreed. Mr. Whedbee pointed out that, in the early stages of
1960, attempts were made to form some sort of coalition of the
miscellaneous Cuban groups. Finally the FRD was born and much
later the CRC, responsibility for which was then transferred to the
White House and the State Department after the invasion. In the first
or early stages mentioned, relatively little had come of our attempts
to generate meaningful activities through Cuban-controlled channels
such as the FRD, that the Agency, to achieve any real degree of success
in developing propaganda and other activities against Castro, had to
form miscellaneous groups, political and collateral, and then try to
SECRET
shove them one way or the other under the umbrella of the FRD.
He pointed out that the most telling criticism made by the press and
by members of the State Department, too, at that time was that
we were forcing those various groups through monetary control into
joining the FRD. He stated further that this had been discussed in
Baltimore last month in detail with Dr. MIRO, who at that time
seemed to agree that if Dr. MIRO and the CRC were to succeed in
controlling the other groups, both collateral and political, it ideally
should be by leadership rather than by exercising financial control.
7. Mr. Whedbee then brought up the question of just how far
should we go in support of MIRO and the Council, and how are we going
to justify some of these expenses. Considerable discussion followed,
at the conclusion of which Mr. Whedbee said he would like to throw out
on the table some specific points simply as an indication of some of
the problem areas which he felt had been at least touched upon by the
discussion and to which in the coming weeks some consideration would
have to be given, although certainly this meeting should not try to
arrive at any definitive answers:
a. It should be clarified whether or not, in fact, some of
those persons listed as receiving salaries from the FRD are also re-
ceiving economic aid from the HEW.
b. It should be noted that Dr. MIRO's request to engage in
activities are sometimes very unrealistic. For example, at one point
Dr. MIRO wanted to take over the Swan Island operation and wanted
to put up a $2,000,000 radio station at Key West to beam propaganda
to Cuba and also to jam Cuban broadcasts.
c. The proposal to have round table discussions including
Dr. MIRO, his military commission, and representatives of the internal
groups to decide on sabotage and commando-type raids is rather un-
realistic for a variety of reasons, including security factors and the
question of whether or not this would be acceptable to any or all of
the internal groups.
d. Dr. MIRO has apparently the idea that he can use his
million dollars for whatever he desires with little or no advance ap-
proval, and above this figure he may ask for unlimited funds for
operations. This area certainly needs clearing up.
e. Dr. MIRO has requested that the Agency turn over to
him the funds, the control of the bank accounts, and the entire
mechanism for making the "dependent payments." This is a rather
key item related to past history. Mr. Whedbee stated it was his
personal opinion that this should not under any circumstances be
turned over to the CRC to administer independently.
f. Relative to MIRO's request for aid to the Escambray
resistance group, Mr. Whedbee stated that he had discussed this
matter very thoroughly with Dr. MIRO, and it appeared from that
conversation that MIRO had had only one indirect contact with this
group. Dr. MIRO had merely a piece of paper signed by RAMIREZ
and several others allegedly in the Escambray, stating that there
were some 30 of them in desperate straits and in need of support and
that, if weapons were given to them, they could muster 100.
Dr. MIRO was at that point not even sure how the paper had got to
him and had no means whatsoever of communicating with RAMIREZ.
He proposed the use of a boat to get the supplies to the North coast
of Cuba, but had no idea how to get them from the North coast to the
Escambray. As an alternative, he suggested an air drop by a plane
from Florida.
g. With regard to the financial aid that MIRO had spoken
to both Mr. Hurwitch and Colonel Johnson about, i.e., the $70,000
monthly to be sent into Cuba via the Italian Embassy, Mr. Whedbee
pointed out that the Italian Ambassador, when contacted by an Agency
representative, stated that he, for the time being, did not want his
Embassy utilized further in this type of transaction, that of the $70,000
given MIRO, apparently only $40,000 was sent into the Italian Embassy
and, of this, a large portion went for the needs of persons in asylum
in the Embassy rather than for support of Cuban internal resistance
elements outside the Embassy. In at least one instance, the Agency,
through separate channels, had, in fact, arranged to send funds to
the principal internal group which was supposed to have received--
but didn't--a portion of the $40,000. Certainly we could not give
further support to this activity without a good deal of clarification of
exactly how future funds were to be sent in by Dr. MIRO.
8. Mr. Hurwitch then said that, with regard to Dr. MIRO's pro-
posal for the Council to establish itself on Cuban soil via a commando
operation and then get U. S. military support, this had been brought up
SECRET
repeatedly with Mr. Goodwin, and Dr. MIRO had been told flatly not
to count on a U. S. military operation against Cuba. Mr. Hurwitch
said that MIRO now seems to be making the same proposal again
through Colonel Johnson, and that he should be discouraged from
making any plans for such an operation.
9. Mr. Hurwitch said that he believed something could be done
for the three Cuban residents of the U. S. who had fought at Playa
Giron, but who now couldn't get aid through the Refugee Council or
Social Security. He offered to take care of any such matters with HEW.
Accordingly, the names and data were left with Mr. Wollam for
Mr. Hurwitch's use. Mr. Hurwitch added that Mr. Wise at the
Refugee Center in Miami might be a good contact if CIA wanted to
handle those matters itself in Miami.
(Signed) R. E. Whedbee
R. E. WHEDBEE
DC/WH/4
DC/WH/4/REWhedbee:lgs (19 October 1961)
Distribution:
Orig. & 1-C/WH/OPS
1-C/WH/4
1-C/WH/4/Plans
1-C/WH/4/PM
1-WH/4/PA-Prop
Attn: Col Johnson
Mr. Ellis
