14-00000
104-10192-10269
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
1 metal containe inf-wustafa ofte United Araree within the marine of the Karatas nue
DAC Berce 793 and the nation of which in ang manreuth wired pere
to hired by law
3--8--T
NOFORN/STINO CONTROL
COUNTRY
Cuba
REPORT NO.
CS-3/505,353
SUBJECT
Status of the Anti-Castro Movement
DATE CASTR.
29 March 1962
In Cuba, December 1961
NO. PAGES
6.
REFERENCES
RD-W-2107
DATE OF
INFO.
20 December 1961
FLACE &
Argentina, Buenos Aires (18 January 1962)
DATE ACQ..
FIELD REPORT NO.
SOURCE:
[officia
service. 24
STATR
THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION SOURCE GRADINGS ARE DEFINITIVE APPRAISAL OF CONTENT IS TENTATIVE.
An official Argentine service
Appraisal of Content: 3.
1. Anti-Castro activities in Cuba include those of the nationwide organized
movements and those of local fronts where independent guerrillas are grouped
in small units. The penetration of the Cuban armed forces is insignificant.
2. The national movements which have been active in Cuba are the Movimiento de
Recuperacion Revolucionaria (MER), Movimiento Democrata Cristiano (MOC),
Movimiento Revolucionario 30 de Noviembre, Novimiento Revolucionario del
Pueblo (127) Rescate Revolucionario, and Directorio Rovolucionario
Estıxliantil (DRE). Other groups with limited organizations are the Unidad
Revolucionaria and the A. (Jacclacica de Andgos de Aureliano Sanchez
Arango). The strength of the groups by province is as follows:
a. Southern Oriente Province (Santiago de Cuba)
X
ARMY
(1) MRR. The MRR, of Nino Diaz, has members from the ranks of the
26 of July Movement and, especially, from the former regular Army.
Its civilian organization is poor, almost non-existent. The men
remain inactive, waiting for a serious military action of a local
or national character.
(2) MDC. The MDC has an adequate civilian organization; from the
founding of the movement Santiago de Cuba has been one of its
strongholds. The military organization is extremely poor. Many
of its leaders have gone into exile or are trying to do so.
They remain totally inactive in hope of an invasion which will resolve
the situation, and only concern themselves about a future political
life, at the time when the present government falls.
(3) 30 de Noviembre. There are few members of the 30 de Noviembre in
Santiago de Cuba, and they lack contact with their national leaders.
They have practically no resources.
REPCINC LANT CECARIB
NAVY
NOFCRN/CONTINUED CONTROL
AIR
SE-C-R-E-T
XNSA
Note: Washington distribution Indicated by "X", Fheld burion by "#")
DIA
IANS X
INFORMA
CI/OFS/W
SI/ENT/RE
H/R
WHEXEC
CHICA/HPCF1/M
WiFI
W/PICY
1 TWW/INTEL FILTER/PA-THART 1 TEW/WAVE 1
TEW/INT/POCHEN/SIT
HABA-10518
BIOGENESIS
CS-3,505,853
COORDINATING ALCASING
ING
14-00000
---3-3-7
KOFOOWAONDE CONTOL
2
:
35-355,553
(4) .l for 1901 the had a good civilian and military cantation.
Infor the arrest of Bethel Gonsales, the national comminator, the
local es-omilater and almost all the members in the province sought asyla.
The new cortinator is trying to rucrganize the movement. There are still
enough men of action, coudry from the 26 of Mily vament, but they have to
re-establish contacts.
(5) Rescate: koscate has no members in this ares.
(6) DRS. DES was completely broken by the succosral uprising of Alberto Muller
and by the arrest in October of "El Fiera", princial co-ordinator. The DRE
still has great prestige in the aros, and there are many who would follow its
direction.
b. Northern Oriente Province
(1) MER. The MRR is practically non-existent in northern Create Province,
with the axception of a few personal contacts of Niro Dias.
(2) NDC. The HOC is poorly organizod and inactive.
•
(3) 30 de Noviembre. It has a modiocre organization,rov mebers, and is
inactive.
(4) MRP, Even before the debacle of October the HRP had a very poor
organization in this ares. Fito Jome: ("kicardo"), the co-ordinator,
was arrested in the roundup at that tips, but escaped and took asylum
in the Ecusdmean Embassy. His successor and the military and civilian
personnel are relatively capabls.
(5) Rescate. It does not exist in this ares.
(6) DSE. It does not exist in this ares.
c. Cassay Provice.
(1) MRR. At the beginning of April 1961 Caballero (fnu), the co-ordinator,
whose nickname is "El Viejo", was arrested and condemned 20 30 years
on the Isle of Fines. Arango (mm), who was named co-calizate in
August, has been forced to seek asylia in Habana. The moreאל המט
been destroyed.
(2) C. The DC has an excellent co-ordinator, Blanco (ra), te is
responsible, discreet, with good connections. The HOC has a very goud
civilian organization and at present is concerned abor its military
organization, for which they already have some personnel. They work
effectively and are trying to carry cut some military actions.
(3) 30 de Noviembre. The civilian organization is relatively good. It has
a small but affective military force.
(C) Canapay is practically the caly province in which the MRP was not
fected by the arrests of October. It has a good civilian garisation
and rilitary forces of importance, which are under the comand of fome
officers of the Rebel Argy. Arquinides Caballero (Estebar), its
faner co-ordinator, took asylum in the Brazilian Entassy; Ricardo",
As replacement, is very young (21 years old) but is considered very good.
(5). It has a poor organization. There are enough me, but they
aminactive.
(6) D. Fow members of the Das remain, and "Tronco" and Barsel Angel Quevedo,
its directors, are known by 0-2. The comment has been destroyed.
:
S----
NOFORN/CONTINUED CONTHOL
14-00000
5---8--7
خود
MOFORM/CONTINUED CONTROL
-3-
03-3/505,053
d. Las Villas Svince. It is estimate that no movement has an effective
organization. in tis province. A few men in each movement maintain this
fiction of the existence of their organizations.
Katanzas Province. This province has been used by the movements as a
route for the entrance and exit of men and military equirment. The points
used are under careful watch, and the personnel doing this work has been
reduced to nothing. The MRR, MDC, MRP, and, to a lesser extent, the
30 de Noviembre have civilian organizations with little or no effectiveness.
1. Habana Province. Provincial organizations practically do not exist, since
provincial work is absorbed by the national comittees of the movements, all
of which are in the City of Habana. The men of the first, second, and even
third rank are, in almost all cases, either prisoners, in asylum, or in exile.
Those who survive have succeeded because of the co-operation of those who,
although not nombers of the movement, are opposed to the government.
8. Pinar del Rio Province. It is estimated that no organised novasanta exist
in Pinar del Rio.
h. National directorates.
(1) MPR. "Esteban", its present co-ordinator, is very young (23 years old),
and lacks the necessary capability. Although he is courageous and
generous, he becanes lost in small details. The group which makes up
the national committee is ineffective, since this movement was largely
destroyed after 17 April 1961.
(2) MDC. The MDC is directed by politicans, little qualified for a clandestine
fight which does not interest them. Alberto del JJmoc, a man of action
who succeed the inefficiat Pepin Fernandez ("Lucas"), had to take asyliza
in the Argentina Embasзу.
(3) 30 de Noriembre. Pedro Forcada ("Villaroals), the present co-crdinator,
is the former secretary-general of the Federacion de beros Quimicos
and has good contacts in the labor field. He knows how to work, but
his attachment to wonen makes him forget his responsibilities frequently.
In November this movement was the victim of a deminciation which
resulted in the arrest of over 40 members. The consequences of the
demunciation are not known. It was attributed by some to Jose Reyes,
Habana provincial financial secretary, and by others to an engineer who
used to work on the national committee.
(4) MRP. The arrest of Reinol Gonzalez has left the MRP reduced to almost
nothing. National leaders held by 0-2 are: Retrol Conzalez ("Antonio"),
Fernando de Rojas ("Pablo") co-ordinator of Habanas Denteria (Inu)
("ñene", co-ordinator of Matanzas; Kery Martines Francisco", labor
co-ordinator; Roberto Jimenez ("Fodro"), national student co-ordinator;
and, in addition, 80 to 90 others were arrestal. Those who took
asylma aver Javier Chacon ("Saul"), co-ordinater of Santiago de Cuba,
and Arcwinedes Caballero ("Estoban"), co-ordinator of Camaguey, in the
Brazilian Embassy; Rafael (kmes ("Ricardo"), co-ordinator of Holguin,
and Jesus Rodriguez ("Comes"), co-ordinator of Las Villas, in the
Ecuadorean Embassy; Francisco Leon ("Pordamo"), successor to Reinol
Conzales, and Mamuel Castro ("Teyo"), chief of military operations,
in the Argentine Embassy; "Agustin", national firance officer, in the
Panasonian Embassy; Dr. Orizondo (nu) (El Docter), who was in charge
of contacts with professional classes, in the Colombian Embassy. A
person known by the nickname Chicho has been designated new national
co-ordinator and is probably the most capable of those remaining. It is
believed that in most cases he can regain 25 per cent of the movement's
previous effectiveness.
SE-C-R-E-T
NOFORN/CONTINUED CONTROL
14-00000.
2000 SONTHOL
00-3/505,853
১.. Les Villas
(1) Corralillo Front. Capite, and Ton-Dikd are the two leaders who have
become well known in this one. Camritos is no longer mentioned,
although he still operates in this area, remaining hidden with soste
20 poorly-armed men. gained fame in the province as the
result of killing some brigalistas arvi militiamen. About the middle
of December 1961 it was
rmored that he had been captured.2
(2) North Front (Yaguajer). For some months there have been groups which
vary between 40 and 100 men, the total for the whole zone. There seems
to be enough food to supply 200 men. In the last weeks (early December
1961) they have carried out some activities such as the brief capture
of the towns of Meneses a General Carrillo, acts which resulted in
the arrest of a great nnber of civilians not connected with the
uprising. Doctor Armanie Delgado, who served as the contact with the
insurgents and was in charge of supplies, has taken asylum in the
Ecuadorean Embassy. His second-in-command, Jimenez (fm), vas arrested.
(3) Escambray Front. The three best-known leaders of this front are
Osvaldo Ramirez, Congo Pacheco, and Pancho Villa. There is no discipline
among the groups, and the front is very disorganized. It is estimated
that the mumber of insurgents does not exceed 300, lacking arms and
having little food. Ramires' reputation among the lower class is good
but not so among anti-Castro leaders because of his notorious criminality.3
The centers of supply of fool and mmitions, such as Placetas, Sancti
Spiritus, Trinidad, Santa Clara, Cienfuegos, and Manicaragus, have suffered
many arrests. It is probable that this front will not grow because of
the lack of organization of the national anti-Castro movements in
Las Villas Province.
Oriente Frovince, Sierra Kaestra Front. "William, former chief of action
of the 30 de Noviembre, rose in rebellion about mid-1961 with a group of
50 man in the Niquero zone. With the aid of different movements organized
in Manzanillo, the help of 50 militiaxen and 25 or 30 robel soldiers, and
the co-operation of a leader of the MRP whose name is minowa, he succeeded
in uniting 200 men. Their lack of arms made possible the capture of
50 of them in August, and "William", who was among them, was executed.
About 100 men remain at present. They have some arms bat are inactive.
Penetration of Military Units of the Cuban Jovernment.
2. Navy. Among the officers only a few have been conspiring and those have
been retired from active service and named as administrators of co-operatives.
The penetration is more effective at some naval posts, through which
equipment can enter. Given the little importance of the Navy and the
luzited peretration within it, it is not believed that the Navy would play
an important part in any national anti-Castro military operation.
b. Pebel Army. The lack of a serious plan of the anti-Castro leaders who have
made contact with the officers of the Rebel Ay has prevented penetration of
the Army from being a significant part of the anti-Castro struggle. It is
estimated that 75 per cent of these afficers on active duty who fought in the
hills during the struggle agalist Batista are now opposed to the government,
but those officers now lack effective control und will not again have it.
There have been some cases of d'ficers providing arms and monitions, but it
has happened only sporadically.
c.
Folice. Dissatisfaction among the police can be considered of wininel
isportance because of the presence of militismen in police stations and the
assumption of police functions by the militias. Although some of the lower-
racking members of the police force are against the regire, their supervisors
are Comrunists.
S-EC-P-8-T
MOPORN/CONTI AND CONTROL

