14-00000
104-10107-10065
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
810
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
ghe
OGC 69-0707
15 April 1969
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
03
Thomas
SUBJECT: Thomas L. Roberts
03
1. Mr. Heinonen called to advise that Mr. Roberts erts) would
be available for a meeting on 11 April and asked if I would come
to the LDGLOBE downtown office to attend. In preparation for
the meeting I contacted Mr. Rocca to determine what recent
developments had taken place in New York with regard to Herbert
Itkin's accepting the compromise solution reached between Messrs.
Hogan and Morgenthau.
2.
Mr. Rocca advised that the State of New York had with-
drawn from the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of
New York its motion to remand Herbert Itkin to the State of New
York for trial. Secondly, Mr. Rocca stated that the Family Court
of Westchester County had denied Herbert Itkin's request for
rehearing the custody award of Mrs. Itkin's two sons. Thirdly,
Herbert Itkin had prepared a draft letter to George Washington
University, School of Diplomacy (sic), in which Itkin purported
to offer a manuscript describing his work with the CIA for
publication by the University. Itkin did stipulate that the University
would have to obtain the approval of the DCI before publication of
the book. It is puzzling to fathom Itkin's real motivation in
making this offer.
03
02
3. I met with Mr. (Roberts on 11 April at the (LED) GLOBE
office in Washington and explained to him the developments which
had taken place with regard to Herbert Itkin's legal entanglements
in New York City. I pointed out to Mr. Roberts that we assessed
his risk of exposure based upon three possibilities: (a) the
unpublished feature article prepared by Barnard Collier of the
103
Times which relates to Herbert Itkin's career could
New New York
29
SECRET
Excluded
dow
14-00000
SECRET
03
об
mention (Roberts in view of his former partnership) with Itkin;
(b) the New York County District Attorney's office has knowledge
of Roberts affiliation with CIA and we are unable to control their
use of that information; and (c) the assumption that Herbert Itkin
has been told by the FBI that Roberts) is affiliated with CIA.
I further explained that at the present time it appears unlikely
that (Roberts) would be directly involved in Herbert Itkin's trial,
but we could not be absolutely certain that such problems would
not arise in the future.
03.
4.
With regard to Mr. (Roberts) future assignments, I
explained that this was a decision which rested with the DDP,
and particularly the European Division, but from a legal standpoint
we were not going to object to MP Mr. (Roberts) R assignment to Paris.) 15-4
I did advise Mr. Roberts that it was our opinion that he would be
better off not to return to New York City as conceivably the
District Attorney's office might want to question him further on
his relationship with Herbert Itkin, and we did not think that this
would be too helpful in trying to maintain (Roberts)
Heinonen noted that the LEGLOBE office had considered sending
Mr Roberts to New York to receive some covert training, but in
view of our concern about the New York area, they would make 03
plans for another location for this training. I asked Mr. Roberts)
to be sure and advise us if he received any communication directly
from Herbert Itkin or any of his associates in the Conestoga, Ltd.
venture, and Mr.Roberts said that he would comply but doubted
that anyone would attempt to contact him.
102
02
cover. Mr.
5. Mr. Heinonen indicated that LED GLOBE would be in touch
with the European Division during the week of 14 April to assess
the risk factors involved in Roberts (Paris assignment and seek a
suitable cover.
1524
John & Theaney
JOHN K. GREANEY
JOHN
Assistant General Counsel
CC: CCSPGLOBE
C/CI/R&A
C/E/F
D/Security
OGC:JKG:bt
3
✓Orig. - (ROBERTS subj file
1 ITKIN subj file
1
1
JKG signer
Chrono
SEGRET

