14-00000
104-10218-10100
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECTET
22 June 1960
SUBJECT:
Meeting with Miss COB, Aide to Jean ORTA
DATE:
3 June 1960
Harry HRISTOS
1. On 3 June 1960 (following arrangements made in Havana, Cuba two
weeks earlier by the undersigned), Miss Jime Cobb arrived in New York City
for a series of meetings and possible recruitment as a contact of the
Division.
2. Originally scheduled to arrive Friday evening 3 June, Miss Cobb
arrived early Friday morning, having left Havana the previous night,
travelling by way of Miami. This complicated matters somewhat since Miss
Cobb was not fully informed of the true reason for our asking her to come
to New York. As a result, she made contact with a few people she
would have rather not have had her see prior to our contact with her. Names
of all persons contacted in New York are contained in a separate memorandum
based on a debriefing carried out in Washington on 6 June 1960. She also
contacted Jorge LUSADO, chief of "Vision" in New York, and attempted to
find out about me from him. He had been briefed by me earlier in the week,
however, and merely referred to me as a "friend" with many contacts in
newspaper field and in government circles. Miss Cobb knows me as "Harry
Hubner" and as far as I know, she has no knowledge of my real name.
3. My first contact with Miss Cobb was made in Havana, Cuba on 28
March 1960. We met in the coffee shop of the Havana Hilton Hotel where I
was introduced to her by Jorge Luis of "Vision". My cover at the time
was that my visit to Havana was being sponsored by "German and French news-
paper interests", leaving somewhat vague my specific sponsors. Miss Cobb
did not inquire about me any further at that time and was helpful in getting
appointments for me and Mr. Claus Jacobi, a legitimate German correspondent
of "Der Spiegel", with certain Cuban officials. We met again several times
during my stay in Havana and I found her a woman with many contacts among
leaders of the revolutionary movement. Before leaving Cuba I met her for
dinner in an attempt to evaluate her possible usefulness to us but made no
further effort toward a recruitment.
4. After returning to Headquarters and discussing her strategic
position within the hierarchy of the revolutionaries, Chief W and Chief
H/A opined that a recruitment attempt should be made in view of the in-
creasing interest in the activities of the Cuban government.
5. On 20 May 1960 on another trip to Havana, Miss Cobb was again con-
tacted and after two meetings was asked to come to New York. At no time
in my discussions with her was CIA named or inferred. In Havana I talked
to her about her "future" and said that I had been somewhat impressed by her
fluency in Spanish and ability to "get around". I asked her if she had an
interest in coming to New York and discussing an employment possibility
which would make use of her talents. In answer to her inquiries as to what
she would have to do, I vaguely referred to reporting and writing and pos-
sibly some public relations activity. She agreed to come and I advanced
her $160.00 to purchase her plane tickets.
6. The question of "leave" to come to New York was brought up for I
told her that I didn't want her to get into difficulties with her office.
She said that she was pretty much her own boss and could find an quite
excuse. Later we decided that I would send her a letter in the name of
her father from New York telling her that her father must be in New York for a
few days and could like to see her. She believed that this would be a good
excuse because all her close high level friends including her boss
know that she is very attached to her father and sends her money from time to
time. I also asked her to come to New York without creating any
suspicions on the part of the police or authorities. She was sure it
wouldn't because of the rather high rate of traffic by the Cuban
officials to and from New York. The thought ambiguous.
7. Miss Cobb told me she has an office on the third floor of the
building in Havana which is the same building where "Vision" is located. Her
principal task is that of public relations vis-a-vis foreign correspondents.
She does translations of upper echelon material for "Vision". In addition to
public relations she has lately been involved in the "Youth Movement" of the
revolutionary government. One of her present tasks is to organize "Youth Camps"
and to make line for an influx of "Foreign Youth leaders" who shall be invited
into the new revolutionary Cuba. She has frequent contact with Fidel's secretary,
Celia Sanchez, and claims to see Fidel about two or three times a month at
irregular periods, usually to translate some articles he has dictated. She has
frequent contact with her boss, JTA, Executive Chief of Fidel's office. She receives
a salary of 280 pesos a month and the fringe benefits that all other revolu-
tionary government employees receive.
8. Miss Cobb, an American citizen employed by the Cuban revolutionary
Government, is a difficult type of person to characterize. Born in the
north American midwest, she left home in her early twenties and has been
restless and more or less "homeless" ever since. She is a "bohemian"
type, and her life with Latin Americans of all walks of life tried her
considerably and has removed much of the womanliness and naivete she once
had. Due to many factors in her past she has become overtly hard and wise
confused. She doesn't quite feel at home anywhere and has said on
several occasions that she has never been fully accepted in the better class
Latina, or Latin Americans from the sec walks of life. She was of the
belief this is one reason why she "fits" in with the revolutionaries"
for they too are not fully accepted by Havana Cubans and more or less stick
to themselves. Miss Cobb has undergone such continual stress in her life
SECRET
In August 1959 she had been in the Revolutionary movement she was essentially
motivated for a few months. A right thing, and till her contest did
not make up her mind to leave Cuba in the near future. Her restlessness
and her love of Fidel Castro and entourage has been another shattered dream, one of a
whole series in her life. As a result, I do not feel she is an "ideal" agent
but in view of the lack of contacts in the revolutionary movement and the
fact that she is a member of the official group, I feel she can be of use
and can be made to pass information and material to us.
9. One of the most difficult problems with Miss COBB will be control.
She has shown good conspiratorial sense which at first surprised me but
after learning more of her background and past activities (long illicit
love affair and engaged in dope traffic) it is probably by now second nature
to her. She will also need considerable steering toward intelligence targets.
Although she sits in the midst of numerous activities of intelligence interest,
her own personal interests until now have been vastly different lives
and much of her recent activity with the revolutionary government has been
guided by emotion and idealism. She is enthusiastic and is liable to take
her first intelligence assignments with some inattention, not purposefully
but as a result of her "collaborating" with a United States service of some
stature against a force she once firmly believed in but lately has been
turning against because of failure to materialize in the idealistic lines
she originally anticipated.
10. Miss COBB also has very few materialistic values or desires. Money
means almost nothing to her as is indicated in the report on her meeting.
Of the cash advanced her for a round trip ticket to New York she claimed
a one way ticket and used the other to pay off debts. She thought nothing
whatsoever of this and apparently obtains and spends money without a true
realization of its value. She lives over her means approximately living
on 10230 pesos (equivalent to dollars) a month, making the difference by handouts
from friends or, if she is really caught short, by having her father send
her money.
11. While in New York, several meetings were held with her and she was
gradually indoctrinated to the fact that my interests in her were of an intel-
ligence nature. CIA was never mentioned in our discussions yet at one point
she said she suspected I must be from CIA because no other government agency
operates outside of the United States and her past experience at the FBI
was of a nature to indicate that they always ask her to visit them at their
offices. (She was questioned once on a trip to New York in connection with
the MARITA LORENZ case.)
12. While in New York discussing her potential with her, it was obvious
that her complex background, present activities, vast circle of friends and
her unstable character would call for a more thorough debriefing. She agreed
to come to Washington with me to "see and talk to a friend" for a technical
evaluation of her ability to act securely and on 6 June 1960 she arrived
at the hotel Blackstone in Washington registering as "Annevoli Giloua". Arrange-
ments were made with W/4/CI to have her polygraphed to which she agreed.
That evening she was taken to the Hotel Raleigh where an extensive debriefing
and evaluation of her was made. The results of this debriefing including a
chronology of her activities and past history are contained in a separate
SECRET
13. Following the polygraph, Miss COBB planned to return to New York
and Havana but due to the length of time that the examination required, she
stayed in Washington until the morning of 7 July. She departed for New York
at 08:00 A.M. and left that evening for Havana, Cuba. She obtained information
of a CIA operative before leaving and managed to pass it on to us through Igor
Cordovitch of "Vision" before her departure. This information concerned
activities of a Cuban agent in Mexico.
14. Miss COBB was told prior to her departure that if she was sincere
in wanting to aid and assist us in obtaining factual information about current
activities in Cuba, she would have to be completely honest and subject herself
to some control. She was given a few targets to concentrate on until our next
meeting as an attempt to evaluate her ability along these lines. She was
asked to obtain names and contacts of Soviet and satellite citizens dealing
with the revolutionary government. She was asked to see the Chief of Press
Latina when she knows him and monitor his activities. She was asked to find
a ruse to see Kung Nai, head of the Free China News Agency (Communist) and
monitor his activities also. Also, she was told to try to determine what
Nunes Jimenez accomplished on his visit to the Soviet Union. She was told
that all matters pertaining to all relations with the Red Chinese and the
Soviets are of interest as well as any indications of local communist party
activities with the Government.
15. At first I was planning to try to establish a local contact,
however, just before her departure Miss COBB alluded that she made
another trip to New York around 1 July and to discuss the matter of a local
contact, if advisable, at that time. I believe it is advisable that we
determine if they want to have local access to Miss COBB and her activities.
If Miss COBB can be controlled and accepts steering, it would perhaps be
desirable to build her into a long range asset of having her become very
cozy with the communist leaders and become, eventually, a "gold" about
the revolutionary movement. Later she could perhaps be used also to operate
in Latin America, probably among the rapid left wing groups that are
becoming increasingly anti-American and more or less pro-communist in various areas.
16. We would appreciate any comments the Havana station may have con-
cerning where and how to establish contact with her locally. We feel that
her usefulness has current need and she may be able to handle many on the
spot assignments for the local station. She does need directions that
could best be handled locally. Her next visit to New York has already
been laid on by her physician friend who will request her to visit the city
for "treatment" before the doctor departs for Europe on a extended trip.
Miss COBB was informed that if her services are considered useful, we will
pay her a sum of 200 Cuban pesos a month. She agreed but she was told that
any unreliability or indication of dishonesty on her part would crack the
relationship. The sum of 200 pesos was suggested after discussing the
matter of compensation with a senior member of the Havana Station.
Distribution
Orig - W/4/CI
1 - W/4/01
1 - W/4/II
1 - Herascorf

