1000000
104-10534-10046
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
!
13 DEC 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: TSD/DB/5
ATTENTION: Mr. Tom Campbell
Approved for Release
by the Central Intelligence Agency
Date: 10/03
SUBJECT: Technical Analysis of Letter and Envelope
1. Attached is a letter mailed to the American Embassy in
Stockholm purportedly from an officer in the Chinese Communist
Embassy in Stockholm. Also included is the envelope and a plain
folded sheet of paper which presumably was used to enfold the
letter within the envelope. Please perform a technical analysis
of these attachments to determine whatever can be determined
concerning the origin of the paper, envelope, typewriter, and
ink used. If you have any capability for comparing this letter
with other correspondence originating with the Chinese Communist
Embassy in Stockholm, we would like your opinion on whether or
not the stationery, typewriter, and envelope are of the type
normally used by that Embassy.
2. Because of the sensational nature of the contents of
the letter and the necessity for our checking out such allega-
tions as quickly and thoroughly as possible, it is requested
that this technical analysis be undertaken on a priority basis
and that the undersigned by notified by phone as soon as any
conclusions are reached.
3. Please acknowledge the receipt of the attached letter
and ensure that its whereabouts, when in your custody, is a
matter of record. We prefer that the letter and envelope be
kept as intact as possible while undergoing technical analysis.
SECRET
Charles P. Kiteley
WE/2
x7659
GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification
4361
13-00000
THIS IS VERY IMPORTANT AND NOT A BAD JOKE!
25/11-63.
The President of the United States of America, John F Kennedy was
assassinated by Lee H Oswald by direct order of the government of
the Peoples Republic of China. Lee H Oswald executed the act alone
but there was helpers and reserv. "Now all is over" was password
to his customers. Oswald was a fully convinced Communist but he
must assassinate Kennedy. We etablised contact with Oswald already
when he was in Sowiet but then to try to get him as a spy for China.
Later he was spy for us. When Lee H Oswald had returned fo USA we
contacten nam anew and Freshened up his mind "you have been a spy
for us" and told him what could happen to him if FBI got informed.
Now we had him. He got his last information in Mexico. /It was not
good to assassinate Kennedy in Mexico/ "Fair Play for Cuba" was
started only to confuse and throw the blame on Castro for the as-
ssassinated. Our government thought that USA should attack Cuba
when Kennedy was murded as the orginaztion was behind the assassin-
ation. When Cuba was attacked by USA Sowiet must help Castro defend
himself. It that was so it would burden Sowiet that Oswald had visi-
ted. We should be allieted with Sowiet then we would ask them for A-
bombs and they should not be able to refuse us. We and Sowiet should
win this war and whole the world should be Communistic. Then we should
assassinate Krustjev and other Sowiet leaders and we would be leader
of the NEW WORD. When this letter will reach you they have maked
away with me and all that knowed the planes. This letter is outsmuggled
from our Embassy in Stockholm where the Embassy is archinese spy-shool.
My name is Ryo Liang Yüan. Officer in the department for State-secret.
If you do not belive this letter explain our hate to USA.
13-00000
SCKHOLM BA
11-12
E
OCKHOLM BAN
5
29.11.53
11-12
E
STOCKHOLMR
15201163
11-12
BAN
35
EMBASSY OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
DEC 2-1933
MAIL ROOM
STOCKHOLM
American Embassy
Strandvagen 101
STOCKHOLM NO
18

