14-00000
104-10181-10154
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CONFIDE
SX-32554
26 Sept 77
1
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT
SOURCE
0
Two MVD Officers in Minsk Who Are Engaged in the
Surveillance of Foreigners
(201-0948382). A foreign-language student from Minsk
who worked in various jobs throughout the USSR. Born in
1949, he emigrated in 1976. Neither his bona fides nor
his reporting reliability has been established.
DATE OF INFORMATION:
1969-76
DATE OF INTERVIEW : 26-28 April 1977
DOCH MICRO SER
2007
MICROFILMED
1. The two MVD officers described in this report are part of
a small (and otherwise unidentified) section of the Minsk City
Internal Affairs Directorate (GUVD) on Dobromyshlenskiy pereulok
(the subject of a separate report). This section is engaged in
the surveillance of foreigners for the apparent purpose of identify-
ing those of their Soviet contacts who may be black marketeers.
2. KOVALEV, Vladimir, whose nickname is "Boni", holds the
rank of senior lieutenant. Born in about 1949, he is 174 cm tall,
of medium build, and has slightly wavy short blond hair. He is
very nearsighted and wears glasses. He dresses modestly and
inconspicuously and has the appearance of an "educated and cultured"
person.
3. KOVALEV is married to Tamara nee MATVEYEVA, and they have
a son, born in about 1972, who attends a special kindergarden for
the children of high-ranking and other privileged officials.
KOVALEVA, the daughter of a retired KGB lieutenant colonel, is a
graduate of an economics institute and works as a senior economist
for the State Committee for Standards, earning 170 rubles per month.
The KOVALEVS live on Bobruyskaya ulitsa directly opposite a bus
station.
4. KOVALEV is a graduate of the Minsk State Pedagogical
Institute of Foreign Languages, where he studied Spanish and English
in the Department of Translating. After graduation, KOVALEV left
Minsk for one year to go into the Army. However, Source found this
hard to believe, as he knew that KOVALEY had been turned down for
military service in 1966 because of nearsightedness. During the
time that KOVALEV was in the Army, his wife told Source that where
her husband was serving "they put army boots on once a month, just
for show." KOVALEV's military service card (voyennyy bilet).
nevertheless indicates both his 1966 rejection and the year that he
supposedly spent in the Army."
5. Source believes Reec Kovaley's father-in-law was instrumental
CONFIDENTIAL
28 Sept 1977
201-948382
CONFIDENTIA
in his choice of a career and probably helped KOVALEV through
his own connections. (Fnu MATVEYEV, the father-in-law, had once
been an important KGB official in the Belorussian SSR.) Source
also believes that KOVALEV, while he is an MVD officer, has close
tles with the KGB and may have been co-opted by ft. He bases this
belief on KOVALEV's close and frequent association with Anatoliy
AKSENOV, a KGB lieutenant (the subject of a separate report).
Yubileynaya, a hotel where foreigners stay, is apparently one of
KOVALEV's assignments, as he is frequently seen there.
The
6. (Fnu) PINYAZ is the MVD officer who works with KOVALEV.
Born in about 1945, PINYAZ' is of average height and build, has
short blond hair, gray eyes, and dresses'simply in an apparent
effort to be inconspicuous. During a drinking session, PINYAZ'
admitted to Source that he "cooperates closely" with the KGB.
PINYAZ' is frequently seen at the Hotel Turist
7. Traces: (SE/SAG/OP routinely uses the following sources
In tracing: Soviet GICS, Soviet travel, IP Main Index, OCR and
SE/SAG/OP branch index. These traces should not be construed as
being extensive or complete and any recipients of this report with
an active interest in any of the subjects should run full traces
of their own.)
A. There are no Headquarters traces on Anatoliy
Aleksandrovich AKSENOV (para 5).
H
*AKSENOV, Anatoliy Aleksandrovich
SEX: M
:
DOB: 1948
POB: USSR. Minsk
CIT:
USSR
OCC:
KGB officer
LOC:
USSR, Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382. In charge of KGB
unit in Yubileynaya Hotel in Minsk.
B. There are no Headquarters traces on Vladimir KOVALEV
(paras 2-5).
*KOVALEV, Vladimir
SEX: M
DOB: ca 42.
POB:
USSR
CIT:
USSR
OCC:
MVD officer
LOC:
USSR, Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382. Is assigned to the
Yubileynaya Hotel in Minsk.
CONFIDENTIAL
C.
There are no Headquarters traces on PINYAZ
fnu
(para 6)
PINYAZ fnu
SEXAM
DOB:ca که
POB: USSR
CITRAUSSR
OCC: MVD officer
LOC BUSSR Minsk
Hotel Tu
~Is assigned to the
Victor
SE/SAG/OP
SE/SAG/OP:Natalie Valetich/Anna Peterson:ek
Distribution:
Orig IP/DMSE (please classify into 201-0948382, Index names
in para 7)
1
C/SE/SAG, C/SE/IO, SE/USSR
SE/RR
SE/CI, attn Joe Flaherty
1- SE/SAG/OP chrono
CONFIDENTIAL
201-948382
14-00000
CONFIDENT
AL
SX-32439
8 September 1977
PKB
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: Organization, Functions, and Personalities of the
MVD in Minsk
SOURCE
(201-0948382), a foreign-language student from Minsk
who worked in various jobs throughout the USSR.
Born
In 1949, he emigrated. in 1976. Neither his bona fides
nor his reporting reliability has been established.
DATE OF INFORMATION:
1969-76
DATE OF INTERVIEW: 26-28 April 1977
The headquarters of the Ministry of Internal Affairs
(MVD) of the Belorussian SSR is on the corner of prospekt Lenina
and ulitsa Uritskogo in Minsk. The Minister is General-
leytenant KLIMOVSKIY. He is married and has two daughters,
both of whom studied in foreign languages at the Belorussian
State University.
2.
. There is an MVD militia unit, called an internal
affairs section (otdel vnutrennikh del, OVD), in each of the
six rayons (precincts) of Minsk, as follows:
A.
Frunze Rayon OVD, on Obuz naya ulitsa.
B... Tsentral'nyy Rayon OVD, on the corner of Respubli-
kanskaya ulitsa and Komsomolskaya ulitsa.
C. Sovet Rayon OVD, on Ploshchad' Ya. Kolasa.
D.
Oktyabr' Rayon OVD.
:
Ε.
Lenin Rayon OVD, at Serebryanka Mikro-rayon.
F.
3.
Zavod Rayon OVD, on Partizanskiy prospekt..
Each of these rayon OVDs (known as ROVD) consists
of the following departments (otdeleniye):
A. Investigations Department (Sledstvennoye otdeleniye).
the largest component of the ROVD, conducts investigations of
all crimes committed within the boundaries of the rayon. Accor-
ding to Source, the best educated and most highly trained
investigators and pinspectors at the militia are to be found
RECORD COPY
CONFIDENTIAL
:
1777
201712312
CONFIDENT
IAL
-2-
in this department In the Frunze ROVU, Inspectors Aleksandr
GLYDOVSKIY and Vladimir MELESHKO were friends of Source, whe
stated that both men have anti-Soviet leanings. An MVD major
Vladimir KOMAROVICH, investigates the most serious cases.
B. The Department for,Combatting the Embezzlement
of Socialist Property and Speculation (OBKhSS) is concerned
with protecting socialist property in state establishments such
as
stores, plants and factories, hotels and restaurants. The
following OBKHSS personalities were known to Source: (fnu)
MALYSHKO and (fnu) POLYANSKIY in the Frunze ROVD, (fnu) KELLER
and (fnu) VYSOTSKIY in the Tsentral'nyy ROVD, and (fnu) SUCHKOV
in the Oktyabr ROVD.
C. Department for Combatting Parasitism (Otdel bor'by
s tuneyadstvom) Source thought that the term "parasitism"
(tureyadstvo) had recently been removed from the USSR Criminal
Code and replaced by "vagrancy, begging and other parasitic types
of existence." But the official procedures remain the same.
Soviet citizens not engaged in socially productive labor are
first given a warning, which they must sign at the department.
If they remain unemployed, their case is turned over to a court,
and the offense is punishable by a sentence of up to two years.
However, there are ways to get around the law. Source says...
that if it can be shown that parents or a spouse are providing
support or if a person can get seasonal work, he can defend
himself before the department. But most citizens are not aware
of these loopholes, according to Source. After the Investigations
Department, this militia department turns over the greatest
number of citizens to the courts. Also, this department and
the law that it enforces are frequently used against dissidents.
D.
Passport Department. Employees of this department:
make entires in the internal passports of citizens regarding
their place of residence, and this department therefore gets
many visitors. The department also enforces passport regulations.
E.... The Guards and Protection (Okhrana) Department
is responsible for providing militia protection to special.
establishments, such as radio and television studios and stations.
This department also provides escorts for prisoners and guards
at trials.
F.
Department of Burglar and Intrusion Alarms (Otdel
vnevedomstvennoy okhrany OVO), Source did not have any informa-
tion on this department except that he thought it provides guards
and watchmen for various enterprises in addition to its work
with alarm systems.
G. Motor Pool (Motodivizion) provides and maintains
patrol cars and motorcycles for the militia.
أ
CONFIDENTIAL
The rayon OVDs (ROVDs) fall under the Minsk City
Internal Affairs Directorate (Gorodskoye upravleniye vnutrennikh
del, GUVD) of the Executive Committee of the Minsk City Soviet.
(fnu) PISKAREV, who holds the rank of general-mayor of internai
affairs, is chief of the Minsk GUVD. The GUVD, which is on
Dobromyshlenskiy pereulok, houses the pretrial detention cell
(kamera predvaritel'nogo zaklyucheniya, KPZ and OVIR). Even
though the Minsk city OVIR falls under the Belorussian Republic
OVIR, there is no republic-level OVIR office in Minsk, although
there are some republic-level OVIR officials who sit in the
MVD headquarters building on prospekt Lenina.
5. Shortly before Source left Minsk to emigrate, he
of two
learned of a very small section in the GUVD, consisting of
or three people engaged in the surveillance of foreigners. Of
particular interest to this section are the foreigners' contacts
with black marketeers (fartsovshchiki). Although Source previous-
ly thought that only the KGB was concerned with black marketeers,
he concluded that the MVD is also involved and that the two
organizations probably work closely together, both posting their
representatives in the hotels where foreigners stay, such as the
Source knew of two
Turist, the Yubileynaya, and the Minsk.
members of this small section, Vladimir KOVALEV and (fnu)
PINYAZ' (who are covered in a separate report).
Victor F. Zimin
SE/SAG/OP
SE/SAG/OP:Anna K. Peterson:ch (7 Oct 77).
Distribution:
Orig IP/DMSE (please classify into 201-0948382)
1 C/SE/SAG, C/SE/IO, SE/USSR
1 - SE/RR
1 SE/CI, Attn: Joe Flaherty
1.SE/SAG/OP chrono
201-94 83 82
CONFIDENTIAL
DOC. MICRO. SER.
SEP 15 1977
MICROF
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SX-32430
2 September 1977
923
SUBJECT: Druzninniki and Operativniki, Voluntary Civilian
SOURCE
Militia Patrolmen
(201-0948382), a foreign-language student from
Minsk, who worked in numerous jobs throughout
the USSR. Born in 1949, he emigrated in 1976.
Heither his bona fides nor his reporting reli-
ability has been established.
DATE OF INFORMATION:
1969-76
DATE OF INTERVIEW : 26-28 April 1977
1.
The druzhina is a group of civilians who volunteer
to assist the militia in maintaining public order. Although
the druzhiny originated spontaneously in about 1962, they
have since become official appendages of the militia. There
is at least one druzhina in each factory, public and commercial
enterprise, institute and technical school. Although the
druzhina officers are supposedly elected, they actually are
appointed by the administration at the factory. A duty roster
is posted. Almost everyone except the management has to be on
duty at one time or another; no one can refuse. It is very
nard to make people, especially the factory workers, roam the
streets on druzhina duty after a day's work because they would
rather go home.
2. In the institutes the druzniny operate this way.
After lectures all the students of a particular department have
to attend a compulsory meeting. The senior druzhinnik of the
institute is in charge of the meeting, together with the senior
druzhinniki and deputies in the departments. Those students
who for some reason did not manage to escape this duty (using
a medical excuse, influence with the chief, or other means),
are then marched to the nearest druzhina post. There are dozen's
of such posts in each rayon (precinct) of the militia, usually
in the basements of apartment houses. Usually there is an offi-
cer of the militia there, with several militiamen of lower ranks.
COFICOYNTIAL
Niph 1977
201-948882
CONFIDENTIAL
-2-
3. At the druzhina post, each druzninnik gets a red arm
band to wear. Then, they are dispatched to different locations
to patrol and uphold public order. What actually happens is
that they just walk around the streets for a while, then return
the red arm bands and go home. Not all of them, however, just
walk around for any number of reasons (desire to get ahead,
anger at the world, or exercise of a little power) some of them
grab off the streets either innocent people or obvious drunks.
and take them to the post. Source himself was taken in several
times to such a post. There a militia officer fills out a re
port, and does not even try to listen to the detained person's
explanation of what happened. If you do not try to prove your
innocence, the matter will end just with a fine of five to ten
rubles and a report to your place of work, which will cause you
to lose any bonus pay at work. If you try to argue, to prove
your innocence, then the action is more serious. A patrol car
that periodically visits each post, picks you up, and takes you
to the rayon MVD. There, the militia nolds you all day. In
the best case, you have to pay a fine of ten rubles, and in the
worst case you receive fifteen days of confinement with com-
pulsory labor, only if there was nothing criminal in your be-
havior. If there was, then you get a trial and a jail sentence.
4.
If the druzhinniki do not bring anyone in, they are
criticized for not doing their job conscientiously. Another
reason for pressure on them, in Source's opinion, is that the
government needs the money from the fines.
5. Some of the more active druzhinnik are offered jobs in
militia after graduation.
6. Source heard about another organization, the opera-
tivniki, but he does not know the difference between them and
the druzninniki. It seems that the operativnik are a little
higher in rank. They meet in secret, no one announces their
meetings, or the names of the members. No one knows or talks
about it.
7.
In the Institute of Foreign Languages, the chief of
the operativnik was Vladimir SHUMRIKOV, born 1939, about 186 cm.
tall, sturdily build, an athlete (former shotputter) who has
short wavy hair, dark eyes, large features, and a fairly handsome,
but somewhat hard face. He graduated from INIYaz in 1973, speaks
English and German, likes to drink, always hangs around the for-
eigners at the sport meets. SHURIKOV has been a Party member
stuce 1973. Source saw him several times with Yevgeniy SURSATOV
(KGB) in a Minsk bar. SHUMRIKOV also knows KCB senior lieutenant
Anatoliy Aleksandrovich AKSENOV.
CONFIDENTIAL
8. Traces: (SE/SAG/OP routinely uses the following
sources in tracing: Soviet GICS, Soviet travel, IP Main
Index, OCR and SE/SAG/OP branch index. These traces should
not be construed as being extensive or complete and any
recipients of this report with an active interest in any of
the subjects should run full traces of their own.)
A. There are no Headquarters traces on Anatoliy
Aleksandrovich AKSENOV (para 7).
H
*AKSENOV, Anatoliy Aleksandrovich
SEX: M
:
DOB: 1948
POB: USSR. Minsk
CIT:
USSR
OCC:
KGB officer
LOC:
USSR, Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382. In charge of KGB
unit in Yubileynaya Hotel in Minsk.
B. There are no Headquarters traces on Vladimir KOVALEV
(paras 2-5).
*KOVALEV, Vladimir
SEX: M
DOB: ca 42.
POB:
USSR
CIT:
USSR
OCC:
MVD officer
LOC:
USSR, Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382. Is assigned to the
Yubileynaya Hotel in Minsk.
CONFIDENTIAL
C.
There are no Headquarters traces on PINYAZ
fnu
(para 6)
PINYAZ fnu
SEXAM
DOB:ca که
POB: USSR
CITRAUSSR
OCC: MVD officer
LOC BUSSR Minsk
Hotel Tu
~Is assigned to the
Victor
SE/SAG/OP
SE/SAG/OP:Natalie Valetich/Anna Peterson:ek
Distribution:
Orig IP/DMSE (please classify into 201-0948382, Index names
in para 7)
1
C/SE/SAG, C/SE/IO, SE/USSR
SE/RR
SE/CI, attn Joe Flaherty
1- SE/SAG/OP chrono
CONFIDENTIAL
201-948382
SECRET
SX-31590
17 Jun 77
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT:
SOURCE
0
Selection and Recruitment of KGB Officers, Agents and
Informers in the Belorussian SSR
(201-0948382), a foreign-language student from task who
worked in numerous jobs throughout the USSR. Born in 182.
he emigrated in 1976. Neither his bona fides por his
reporting reliability has been established N
DATE OF INFORMATION: 1972-1976
DATE OF INTERVIEW
26-28 April 1977
:
2. Source's curiosity about the selection and recruitment of KGB
personnel was aroused when AKSENOV told him that he was considering
the recruitment of Source as a KGB informant. Source asked AKSENOV
who is selected and for what reasons. AKSENOV replied that the KGB
usually uses spotters, who recommend people for recruitment. Back-
ground is important. A person from a peasant or worker's family is
considered a better choice, and he must either be a quiet and colorless
type who blends into the circle of people in which he operates, or
else a conspicuous loudmouth who asks embarrassing questions. The
latter would be more likely suspect of being a member of the opposi-
tion rather than a KGB informant. The average informant, according
to AKSENOV, is not very bright because KGB officers themselves are
not particularly intelligent and are afraid of anyone who is smarter
than they. Source says that he was never recruited.
3. Both Source and AKSENOV think that in the remote areas of the
USSR there are very few cases of such a recruitment pitch being
turned down. Far from the big cities the KGB is an all-powerful
instrument, and anyone who refuses just to report on the conversations
of his friends in the name of patriotism will end up with dismal
career prospects unless he has friends in high places. However, it
is unlikely that such a person would be chosen for a KGB recruitment
pitch in the first place. Therefore most of the lower levels of the
KGB consist of people from simple backgrounds for whom there are no
other career prospects and who prefer this kind of service to being
in the Army.
4. The KGB officers in the Belorussian SSR are also those who
are not bright enough to make a career in some other field, such as
science, engineering, or foreign languages, but they differ from
the lower-level cadres in that they are the sons of high-ranking
gh-ranking,
17 Juni 1977
20129485ER
COS EOCRET
SECRET
-2-
Party and government officials. This is why so many sons of
Belorussian dignitaries work for the KGB. Otherwise they would be
doomed to jobs which would pay ha, et rost, 120 rubles per month
for the rest of their lives, even if they could survive the competi
tion in a Party job. In the KGB, an officer, who achieves such
status by going through a school, can look forward to steady
promotions until he reaches the rank of major And if his sponsor
retains his influence, the officer can eventually be promoted to
lieutenant colonel or even colonel before retiring. Also, it is a
prestigious, interesting, and financially advantageous job which
places the KGB officer above the common people to the point where
many officers consider themselves to be above the law. Their
salaries are often supplemented by discreet cooperation with black
marketeers, who pay off either in goods or a percentage of the take.
And there are the services of the women who sleep with foreigners.
for money or for other considerations, and who report to the KGB
So a person like AKSENOV, responsible for a large tourist hotel like
the Yubileynaya, actually presides over a small kingdom.
5. A KGB officer meets each of his agents (filer was the word
used by Source) in a safe house (konspirativnaya kvartira). Other
officers are not supposed to know who these agents are, and this
"conspiracy" is a matter of great pride to them. Source was once
caught leaving the hotel room of a Bulgarian girl with whom he had
spent the night, but he was released when he gave AKSENOV's name to
the junior KGB officer on duty (thereby implying that Source was on
assignment for AKSENOV).
6. Source described KGB influence as "overwhelming". For example,
a Soviet going abroad on an official assignment cannot refuse to
cooperate with the KGB because such refusal would mean that the
person wouldn't be able to travel, o travel, as the KGB has a say about his
final clearance. Source also gave the example of an applicant for an
unimportant job with the Minsk Symphony who was originally turned
down. But when AKSENOV spoke to the KGB officer responsible for the
Symphony, the applicant was not only hired but received the greatest
respect from the Symphony Director during the entire period of his
employment.
7. The KGB likes to recruit retired military personnel (otstavniki)
because they are considered politically reliable and patriotic.
Many otstavniki recruited by the KGB are former Osobyy otdel (Special
Section, security functions) people, so KGB work is not a novelty for
them. Such retirees are frequently used in stationary positions,
reporting on or guarding specific areas.
8. Since the KGB relies on spotters for the selection of its
agents, the spotters themselves can get into trouble if they recommend
the "wrong" person. This means that the spotters are afraid to select
clever people, so in the end they select mediocre ones. Selection
is determined by the following: If the prospective agent or informer
is a kolkhoznik, he is immediately 50% qualified. If he was in the
Army, particularly in the Osobyy otdel, this adds another 30%.
qualifications are based on the person's being "quiet", "average",
or "ordinary".
Other
SECRET
9 The spotter is supposed to turn in a list of potential recruits
and write a recommendation for each person
The prospective agent or
informer is then called in and an an offer to to cooperate with the KGB 1s
made. Source never heard anything about money being mentioned, but
the KGB does offer help in the advancement of one's career. The
initial assignments are very simple: The agent or informer just has
to keep his eyes and ears open and to report anything that smacks of
anti-government or illegal activity. Who can refuse such a call to
patriotic vigilance? And if one does, he might well be classified
as an enemy of the state and end up doing the lowliest physical labor
rather than enjoying a promising career
10. AKSENOV also told Source that the KGB usually opens a file
on a Soviet citizen who corresponds with anyone abroad. After this,
hi's telephone conversations are monitored and periodically recorded.
And finally, KGB agents and informers who come into contact with
him will be asked to report on him.
11. Source once asked AKSENOV what the KGB would consider its
greatest accomplishment. AKSENOV replied that the discovery of a
secret agent (nelegal) would be first on the list, followed by the
discovery of an illegal printing press. Without printed matter a
revolution cannot take place, according to AKSENOV. Third on the
list is the discovery of the illegal possession of a rifled weapon,
such as a rifte or pistol. This last item would not be considered
particularly important in itself, but a KGB officer can do very well
for himself if he plays his cards right. He must time the discovery
of the illegal weapon with a public event involving the visit of an
important Party or government dignitary. Thus, in the eyes of his
superiors, his discovery is tantamount to thwarting an assassination
attempt. Any one of the three accomplishments would lead to automatic
promotion, a medal, and tenure for life in the KGB.
12. Traces: (SE/SAG/OP routinely uses the following sources in
tracing: Soviet GICS, Soviet travel, IP Main Index, OCR and SE/SAG/OP
branch index. These traces should not be construed as being extensive
or complete and any recipients of this report with an active interest
in any of the subjects should run full traces of their own.)
There are no Headquarters traces on Anatoliy Aleksandrovich
AKSENOV (para 1).
14
*AKSENOV, Anatoliy Aleksandrovich
SEX: M
POB: USSR
CIT: USSR
:
OCC:
KGB official
LOC: USSR. Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382. In charge of KGB unit
in Yubileynaya Hotel in Minsk.
SECRET
Distribution:
Orig - IP/AN (please classify into 201-0948382 and index indicated
name in para 12)
1 C/SE/SAG, C/SE/IO, SE/USSR
1 - SE/RR
1 SE/CI, Attn: Joe Flaherty
1.SE/SAG/OP chrono
201-94 83 82
CONFIDENTIAL
SX-31527
12 May 1977
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
0
X
SUBJECT: KGB presence in a tourist hotel in Minsk not?
SOURCE:
نات
(201-0948382) A foreign language student from Minsk,
who worked in numerous jobs throughout the USSR.
Born
in 1949, he emigrated in 1976. Neither his bona fides.
nor his reporting reliability has been established.
DATE OF INFORMATION:
1972-76
DATE OF INTERVIEW: 26-28 April 1977
Most of this information was obtained from Anatoliy
Aleksandrovich AKSENOV, a senior lieutenant of the KGB, and
other friends and classmates of Source who are at present KGB
and militia officers. AKSENOV was at that time in charge of
the KGB unit in the Yubileynaya Hotel, Minsk.
2.
In each tourist hotel in Minsk there is a so-called
militia punkt (unit). It is usually in a room on the first floor
of the hotel somewhere off the lobby. Supposedly this is a
militia unit whose purpose is to protect foreigners, maintain
order in the hotel, and prevent black-marketing. Actually, this
unit is manned by KGB representatives in militia uniforms who
carry militia as well as KGB identification. The militia seems
to be the favorite cover for the KGB.
3. In the Yubileynaya Hotel this unit always had four or
five persons on duty. During the day it had two privates and
a sergeant in uniform and two officers in civilian attire. At
night, when on duty, all of them usually wore militia uniforms.
Aside from the above-mentioned militia functions, their actual
mission was to prevent what they considered to be unnecessary
contact of Soviet citizens with foreigners, to observe any
suspicious actions by either, and to ensure that only approved:
persons. had access to the hotel. All other Soviet citizens
would be stopped, their documents checked, and their business
questioned. An officer from such a unit once stopped Source
after he had spent the night with a Bulgarian girl in the hotel.
Source thinks he was discovered through audio surveillance.
CONFIDENTIAL
12 May 1972
201-948280
CONFIDENTIAL
-2-
He released
This officer showed his militia identification, and asked for
and checked Source's documentation by telephone.
Source without making any report, because Source, by veiled
references to AKSENCY, managed to make this officer believe
The was AKSENOV's agent. Later Source learned that this officer was
AKSENOV'S KGB subordinate..
4 The KGB also has an audio surveillance room and possibly
Source
several saferooms in the hotel. Once in 1975, after drinking
with Source for several hours in a restaurant, AKSENOV invited
him to come to the "special place" in the Yubileynaya Hotel.
Source thinks that AKSENOV probably telephoned before going to the
Yubileynaya. Source was led through a number of corridors to
a room in the back of the hotel which AKSENOV unlocked with a
key. There was no one in the room, although AKSENOV later told
Source that there are supposed to be two people on duty at all
times. AKSENOV and Source continued drinking in the room.
Source did not pay too much attention to details, but at one
point, apparently in order to impress Source with KGB capabilities.
AKSENOV showed the Source a tape recorder, which was of foreign
or Baltic republic make, and let him listen through the earphones
to what was being recorded from a room under surveillance.
claimed that he could hear all the sounds in the room, that of
running water, etc. AKSENOV switched from room to room; audio
quality was uniformly good. AKSENOV later explained that this is
the audio surveillance room (komnata proslushivaniya) and that
the KGB is capable of listening in to any room in the hotel.
Alog using notations in code (according to Source's best recol-
lection) is kept indicating the time periods of listening in on
each room, and the conversations actually recorded. Source
was unable to recall whether there was more than one tape récorder
in the room or how one recorded segment was distinguished from
another on the tapes. He presumed that it was done by voice
announcement, but he did not remember seeing a microphone which
would be used for this purpose. None of these technical details
were explained either then or later by AKSENOV.
5. AKSENOV never mentioned any phone surveillance and Source
presumed that this is done in a different location, outside
the hotel.
There is apparently
The running of water
6. In subsequent conversations, AKSENOV told Source that
all rooms occupied by foreigners are listened to by a spot check
from the time that the occupant enters his room.
a device which indicates when this occurs.
as an audio hindrance is a useless measure, AKSENOV said, as
KGB audio technicians are able to eliminate this as well as many
other extraneous noises in order to make the conversations
audible.
CONFIDENTIAL
7.
Later Source learned (he does not remember from whom)
that telephones are also used as audio listening devices and
that they are effective even without the receiver being taken
off the hook (1.e., hot mike).
8. Traces: (SE/SAC/OP routinely uses the following
sources in tracing: Soviet GICS, Soviet travel, IP Main Index,
OCR and SE/SAG/OP branch index. These traces should not be
construed as being extensive or complete and any recipients of
this report with an active interest in any of the subjects
should run full traces of their own.)
There are no Headquarters traces on Anatoliy Aleksandro-
vich AKSENOV (para 1).
AKSENOV, Anatoliy Aleksandrovich
SFXM
DOB:ca: 4
POB: USSR
CIT:
USSR
OCC:
KGB officer
LOC:
USSR, Minsk
Known to Soviet emigre 201-0948382.
of KGB unit in Yubileynaya in Minsk
Victor F. Zímin
SE/SAG/OP
SE/SAG/OP:Isabelle H. Domes:ch (7 Jun 77)
Distribution:
Orig
IP/AN (please classify into 201-0948382 and index
indicated name in para 8).
1 C/SE/SAG