14-00000
104-10103-10328
:
1944
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
CHRONOLOGICAL SUMMARY
According to his prepared statement, dated 30 November
1962, OLTMANS claimed he had been arrested at the age of 19 [1944]
by the German S.S. to be liquidated.
[Hearing before the Senate Subcommitee to Investigate the Adminis-
tration of the Internal Security Act and Other Internal Security
Laws of the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, Eighty-
Seventh Congress, Second Session, 1963, p. 31.]
31 July 1945 - May 1946
OLTMANS entered the Royal Dutch Marine Corps as a war
volunteer on 31 July 1945 and received an honorable discharge
therefrom in May 1946.
:
[FBI Field Report (FR) (New Haven), 15 January 1962 DBF 99933.]
27 October 1948
:
An American visa no. 188 was issued to OLTMANS on 27
October 1948 in Rotterdam, Holland.
[FBI FR (New York), 29 June 1962 DBA 14523.]
1 November 1948
:
OLTMANS enrolled at Yale University and was admitted to
the sophomore class. He majored in international relations. He
became president of the International Relations Club at Yale, 1949-
1950 and was a student resident of the Pierson College dormitory.
While at Yale he exhibited an interest in hockey, golf, skiing,
sailing, and playing in the New Haven symphony orchestra.
[FBI FR (New Haven), 15 January 1962
1950
-
DBF 99933.]
5
According to an official Dutch service
OLTMANS studied
at Yale University but was expelled for "misbehavior" (not further
explained).
[CSCI-3/748,549 4 February 1958 (from report dated 12 February
5
1957 from an official Dutch service)
service).]
4 March 1950
:
OLTMANS resigned from Yale University, having been noti-
fied that his grades were not sufficient for him to obtain
SECRET
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
2
RS
scholarship aid from Yale and due to the fact that he had insuf-
ficient financial resources to continue his college studies.
[FBI FR (New Haven), 15 January 1962 DBF 99933.]
Before 1851
:
After living an unknown length of time in The Netherlands
East India, OLTMANS went to South Africa, then to the United States,
where he studied for a time at the Institute of Foreign Relations.
[ΟΝΙΑ, 21527, 14 July 1961
1
1951
Cofficial
:
5
official Dutch Service. Service]
OLTMANS arrived in The Netherlands where he became a
student-journalist for the Algemeen Handelsblad; later moved to
the United States, after which he left for Italy as a free lance
journalist.
CONHA 21527, 14 July 1961
1954
Lofficial
5
official Dutch Service.] Service.
:
OLTMANS questioned by the Amsterdam police on the charge
of having had homosexual relations with a minor. The case was
dismissed for lack of evidence.
[FBI Memorandum, 30 March 1962.]
August 1954 November 1955:
Described as a translator in the Amsterdam bureau of the
United. Press.
[FBI FR (New Haven), 15 January 1962 DBF 99933.]
OLTMANS' former wife, Freida (now married to Peter BIE-
LING), claimed she had met OLTMANS while she was on vacation in
Holland. He claimed he was employed as a reporter for the United
Press in Amsterdam. She later determined that he was a teletype
operator. She claimed that shortly after he was fired from this
job and he began to work as a free-lance writer.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
۱
About September 1954
:
In about September 1954, H. J. O. Van HAAGEN, of Amster-
dam, lodged a complaint to the effect that OLTMANS had frequently
SECRET
RS
2VICE 4
by Irenem.
committed acts of lewdness with his (complainant's) under-age
son during the summer of 1954. Inquiries into the matter failed
to reveal any evidence of any offense having been committed.
When interrogated, and also when being confronted with
each other, both the persons concerned denied any act of lewdness
having taken place between them. There was, however, evidence that
OLTMANS' conduct toward the boy had been somewhat strange, which
caused the latter to discontinue his association with OLTMANS.
:
As there was no evidence of any homosexual relations
having existed between the persons concerned, the Chief Commissio-
ner of Police, Amsterdam, was of the opinion that the matter should
not incriminate OLTMANS and should not be used in deportation pro-
ceedings against him.
[FBI FR (New York), 11 March 1963 DBA 35747.]
1956
As correspondent for De Nieuwsgier, OLTMANS covered the
visit to Indonesia of the Soviet Chief of State, VOROSHILOV. At
several mass meetings the Russian President severly censored The
Netherlands, he pleaded for the immediate transfer of New Guinea
to Indonesia, and posing as the great supporter of the young state,
he in this way assured the Communist Party of a resounding election
victory not long after. As a result the relations between Indonesia
and The Netherlands deteriorated considerably.
[Haagse Post, 15 April 1961.]
Early 1956
:
OLTMANS learned that SUKARNO planned to pay a visit to
Italy and he asked his papers whether they would be interested in
an exclusive interview. The response was negative. At the same
time, however, OLTMANS contacted the Agence France Presse which en-
gaged OLTMANS, at a daily fee of some 30 guilders, to cover SUKARNO's
visit to Rome. The then 32-years old OLTMANS contacted SUKARNO dur-
ing a reception at the Indonesian Embassy, and he managed to inter-
view SUKARNO. This interview made a great hit with the AFP which
asked OLTMANS to cover SUKARNO's trip through Italy.
In those days, OLTMANS got the firm conviction that he had
SECRET
to fulfill a mission: a new formulated meeting of the interests of
The Netherlands and Indonesia. He wanted to go to Djakarta to make
a thorough study of the problems and after paying a number of visits
he secured financial aid (10,000 guilders) of some six Netherlands
enterprises with interests in Indonesia. Moreover, he entered into
arrangements with some papers, for which he could write articles as
their foreign correspondent.
In Djakarta, he soon met numerous Dutchmen, including
Professor P...N. DROST (who after having served in 1950 for one year
with the United Nations Human Rights Division, discontinued his ser-
vice because of unsatisfactory cooperation). During a visit which
he paid to DROST, OLTMANS discussed with him the position of the
Dutch in Indonesia, their dissatisfaction with the policy pursued
in The Hague, their desire to emerge from the Indonesian-Netherlands
impasse and in this connection also the New Guinea issue. He made
the suggestion of expressing all these desires in an address to the
States General; Professor DROST himself was enthusiastic over it,
and that very evening, he drafted an address which was stenciled
with the cooperation of a Dutch enterprise in Djakarta, and within
some days was signed by 300 Dutch nationals.
The address, which invited Parliament to set talks with
Indonesia going again and to assume a more accommodating attitude
towards SUKARNO because otherwise sharp measures were to be expec-
ted against Dutch nationals and interests in Indonesia, was used by
the Indonesian representative to the United Nations to weaken the
official arguments. In The Netherlands press a storm was raised
against the signatories to the address and especially against the
journalist OLTMANS who was cited by DROST as the initiator. The
papers for which he acted as foreign correspondent terminated the
contracts.
[Haagse Post, 15 April 1961.]
1956
:
OLTMANS claimed during an open session before the Senate
Subcommittee, on 30 November 1962, that he interviewed SUKARNO in
Role, although the editor of De Telegraaf, the leading Dutch news-
paper, forbade OLTMANS to interview President SUKARNO.
SECRET
"In order to verify my impressions, I went to Indonesia
for the first time in my life for the Nieuwe Rotterdamse Courant,
that is the Times of The Netherlands, and I stayed there until
1956 and 1957, and I made many trips throughout the country, and I
got to know President SUKARNO intimarely, and I am now writing a
book on him, the first book ever written on SUKARNO".
[Hearing before Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962, p. 42.]
May 1956
:
Inasmuch as OLTMANS had not been very successful in his
writings in Holland, he went to Rome where he was able to wangle an
invitation to a reception for SUKARNO at the Indonesian Embassy. He
then contacted the representative of a leading French newspaper and
offered to do a story on SUKARNO for that newspaper. This offer
was accepted, and OLTMANS subsequently attended the reception for
SUKARNO, where he presented SUKARNO with a silver ash tray. Appar-
ently through this meeting and subsequent meetings SUKARNO permitted
him to travel with the press entourage from Indonesia which was tra-
veling with SUKARNO. He later became the only Western newspaperman
who traveled with the SUKARNO party as it made its way around Europe
on state visits and this travel included a visit to Yugoslavia.
was unable to go to the USSR as he was unable to obtain a visa and
to get a seat on the airplane. Frieda BIELING stated that despite the
cordiality of Indonesian newspapermen toward OLTMANS there was a
certain amount of jealousy exhibited by these newsmen because of
OLTMANS' close personal contact with SUKARNO.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
He
OLTMANS subsequently returned to Holland where he started
to contact various Dutch industrial corporations whose holdings in
Indonesia had been seized or were in jeopardy of being seized by the
Indonesian Government. He was able to convince some of these indus-
trialists, particularly a Mr. REINKENS, the President of Unilever,
that because of his close relationship with SUKARNO he would be able
to arbitrate between the industrial empires and the Indonesian
Governinent for adequate compensation for their properties. In addi-.
tion, he had also made arrangements with the Amsterdam newspaper
Elsevier to furnish them with several articles concerning Indonesia
SECRET
and, according to Mrs. BIELING, did have two or three articles
published from Indonesia.
[Ibid.]
December 1956.
:
OLTMANS went to Indonesia. Shortly after his arrival
there, he published the so-called "appeal of Netherlanders in
Indonesia to The Netherlands States General" to reconsider its a
attitude on Netherlands New Guinea. The signatures under this
appeal were collected through the intermediary of the Nieuwsgier,
a Dutch language newspaper now, according to sourc e, completely
in Indonesian hands and assumed to be indirectly controlled by
the Indonesian Government.
[CSCI-3/748,549 4 February 1958 (from a report dated 12 February
5
1957 from a Dutch official source source).)
February 1957
:
OLTMANS' efforts to bring about some type of rapproche-
ment between the industrialists and the Indonesian Government ap-
parently failed and in February 1957, at which time Frieda BIELING
was in the United States, she received a telegram stating he was
coming to the United Nations to do press work for the Indonesian
Government. At the time he arrived, the whole question of Dutch
control of New Guinea was being brought before the United Nations
and she presumed that this was the reason for his arrival in the
United States.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
9 February 1957
Notice from Immigration and Naturalization Service
announcing OLTMANS' arrival in Honolulu. The reason given for
this visit was to attend the United Nations General Assembly
(about four weeks).
[Enclosure to CSCI-3/775,788.]
19 February 1957
:
OLTMANS married Frieda WESTERMAN.
According to her, her marriage to OLTMANS was not a normal
SECRET
RS
relationship, e.g., he was constantly traveling and had left the
United States less than a month after their marriage. On theday
of their marriage, ten minutes after the ceremony, he had left her
and she was walking through Greenwich Village in New York City by
herself.
At one time her father had determined that OLTMANS had a
police record for molesting young boys in Amsterdam, Holland, and
that he had been under psychiatric care with his uncle, a well-known
Dutch psychiatrist, for homosexuality. Subsequently, by chance, she
read a diary which he maintained, which gave a detailed account of
his daily life, in addition to his homosexual activities; she stated
that this convinced her that she must obtain a divorce.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
September 1957
:
OLTMANS traveled to The Netherlands.
After paying a
number of visits to prominent Dutch politicians and industrialists,
during which he pleaded for talks on Irian (Netherlands New Guinea)
between the two countries, he rented a reception hall in the Hotel
de Witteberg, and organized a meeting of some well-known members of
Parliament, of the Council of State, industrialists, and financiers.
This meeting actually took place on 16 October 1957. OLT-
MANS opened the meeting and warned about an impending Irian action
unless early talks were initiated with the Indonesians. At the con-
clusion of the meeting OLTMANS received 1500 guilders to cover expen-
ses (which actually amounted to 900 guilders).
[Haagse Post, 15 April 1961.]
17 April 1958
5
An official Dutch source stated that according to press
communications dated 17 April 1958, OLTMANS wrongly posed as a
correspondent of the Wall Street Journal while in Djakarta.
[CSCI-3/767,597 18 October 1961 to I&NS.]
10 June 1958
:
OLTMANS was readmitted to the United States as a permanent
resident. He had been issued an M-1 visa and was carrying a Dutch
passport no. Z016214 issued by the Diplomatic Representative in
SLCRET
ㅗ
RS
Djakarta, Indonesia. He claimed to be a non-quota immigrant as
the husband of Josephine A. F. OLTMANS, a United States citizen.
[FBI FR (New York), 29 June 1962 DBA 14523.]
Summer of 1958.
:
OLTMANS worked in a book store at the old terminal at
Idelwild Airport, but he was subsequently fired from this job.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
:
OLTMANS began lecturing on political affairs for Colston
September 1958
Leigh.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
1959
:
According to an article appearing in Haagse Post on 15
April 1961 (an independent weekend publication with a nationwide
readership), "Leading figures of Netherlands trade and industry
had a secret arrangement with President SUKARNO two years ago in
Rome to talk with him about Netherlands assets in Indonesia. How-
ever, they waited in vain in the Italian capital for several weeks;
in spite of a clear arrangement made via a Dutch journalist, SUKARNO
failed to turn up.
the
"His name is only known to few in The Netherlands
young. Dutch reporter who, an intimate friend of SUKARNO, for five
long years has been trying to lay contacts between the Indonesian
Chief of State, Netherlands captains of industry and Netherlands
politicians the same man who currently is active in the United
States and in the lobbies of the United Nations and is the trouble-
some opposite number of (Foreign) Minister LUNS: it is the 35-year
old Willem L. OLTMANS, who stands recorded with Domestic Security
Service as an activist opposing Dutch interests, but who himself
emphatically says 'Whatever I do I am doing in the interest of The
Netherlands and international peace'."
[Haagse Post, 15 April 1961; reported in American Embassy airgram
no. G-474, from The Hague, 21 April 1961.]
May 1959
:
Because of OLTMANS' wife's employment with KLM she was en-
SECRET
titled to a free airplane flight, as was her husband, to any point
on the KLM system and so he decided to meet SUKARNO in Istanbul
while he was on his way to Copenhagen. She said that she joined
her husband in Amsterdam when the SUKARNO party arrived there and
then they subsequently went on to Copenhagen.
[FBI FR (New York), 1. February 1962 - DBA 796.]
19 May: 1959
According to an FBI source, OLTMANS had formerly been
carried as a United Nations correspondent to the Amsterdam news-
paper Vrij Nederland; however, he has not been accredited since
19 May 1959.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 DBA 796.]
1 February 1960
OLTMANS spoke before the Women's Club in Sewickly, Penn-
sylvania, in a speech entitled "Let's Stop Losing Friends Abroad".
His services in making this speech were obtained through a New York
booking agent, Colston Leigh. He made, according to this source,
many stining remarks regarding the United States and expressed opi-
nions of a definite anti-Netherlands nature. He referred to the
Netherlands Government as stupid and stated The Netherlands should
have given New Guinea to Indonesia. He mentioned that the Netherlands
Government considers him a traitor. It was observed by this source.......
that OLTMANS is accepted in the well-to-do circles and that listen-
ers are impressed by him. Source commented that although OLTMANS
calls himself anti-communist, his views are at best those of a great
admirer of communism and what the communist system represents. Many
of those with whom he comes in contact dodnot recognize his true sym-
pathies.
[FBI FR (Pietsburgh), 14 March 1960 DBF 45391.]
1960
:
OLTMANS in the Congo.
[ONHW 13150, 26 April 1961.].
January 1960
OLTMANS states (during an executive session, 16 August
SECRET
1962) "My first visit (to Cuba) was abrief one and I did not
write about it. I made a statement to Revolucion and El Mundo,
two Havana newspapers, in which I said that it seemed to me of
primary importance that relations between Washington and Havana
remained fluent [sic
fluid?] and that the U. S. Government
should work together with CASTRO. I likened Fidel CASTRO to
President SUKARNO of Indonesia. I drew a parallel and called both
leaders the fathers of their countries. I do know SUKARNO rather
intimately well and I saw clear similarities, at that time, in their
political philosophies. I maintained that I believed Cuba should
associate with the Afro-Asian bloc, as foreign Minister Raul ROA's
visits to Cairo and Belgrade at the time seemed to suggest. That
same year President SUKARNO went on a state visit to Havana".
[Hearing before the Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962, p. 34.]
30 June 1960
Frieda BIELING stated she and her husband were separated
in March 1960. She obtained a Mexican divorce on 30 June 1960.
[FBI FR (New York), 1 February 1962 - DBA 796.]
August and September 1960 :
OLTMANS traveled to Leopoldville and Brazzaville as a
journalist with Vrij Nederland. He was strongly pro-LUMUMBA in
his comments, and criticized the French interference in the Congo's
politics.
:
[CSCI-3/767,597 18 October 1961 to IGNS; ; source:
5
Official Dutch
Service.]
9 September 1960
OLTMANS left Brazzaville for Rome.
5
[CSCI-3/767,597 18 October 1961 to I&NS; source: Official Dutch
Service.]
Latter Part of 1960
:
OLTMANS visited Cuba as a guest of Ambassador BISBE
:
(Cuban Ambassador to the United Nations).
[Hearing before Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962, p. 44.]
SECRET
2
25
Late 1960 or Early 1961 :
OLTMANS states (during an executive session on 16
August 1962) that "following my second journey to Cuba, as
reported in the Republican of Pottsville, Pennsylvania, I
have said, 'It takes me a long time before I call anyone a
communist, for we too often call foreign leaders communists,
but, under Fidel CASTRO, Cuba is going communist'."
[Hearing before a Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962, p. 35.]
19
-
31 December 1960
OLTMANS in Bonn, Germany, as a correspondent of the
Vrij Nederland, to inform himself of the relations between
Germany and the USSR, of the German position on NATO and of
the question concerning the reunification of the two parts
of Germany. According to source, OLTMANS calls himself anti-
communist; however, he is greatly interested in the communist
countries in Asia and Europe and throughout the world.
5
[CSCI-3/767,597 18 October 1961 to I&NS; from official
Dutch Service.l
18 December 1960
:
OLTMANS wrote in the Providence Journal (R. I. ?) that
kids on the street (in Havanal wave communist Chinese flags
and wear hammer and sickle insignas..
teenage boys stroll
around carrying revolvers and Czech-made weapons.. CASTRO
has ordered the loyal Fidelistas to report defeatists to the
police
year ago.
•
what a difference the Cuba today of what I saw a
today people live in fear they thought had gone
forever with the ouster of the dictator BATISTA.
..
".
[Hearing before a Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962, p. 31.]
1 January 1961
OLTMANS states (during an executive session on 16 Au-
gust 1962) that "I reported in the same paper [Providence
Journal], 'These cooperatives are only a hairbreadth from the
Chinese commune system. And the hairbreadth may well disappear
when CASTRO begins to feel the pinch of the U. S. embargo on his
sugar crop.
:
CASTRO has made no bones about the fact that he
SEGRET
means to foment revolt throughout Latin America.
.'."
[Hearing before a Senate Subcommittee, 30 November 1962,
pp. 34-35.]
1961
The Station in The Hague learned from the American
Consulate's fileson OLTMANS that he is almost certainly homo-
sexual and in 1961 attempted to bring to the United States,
at his own expense, a homosexual friend named Albert HILVER-
DINK, born on 11 May 1931 in Batavia, Java, dancer, Dutch
passport no. D 966180; address: Kwintheulstraat 4, Amsterdam.
[ONHA 27828, 14 February 1964.]
1961
OLTMANS met willem VERRIPS after H. Vander JAGT, Chief
of the Passenger Department, KLM Royal Dutch Airlines, New York
City, had requested OLTMANS meet with VERRIPS in New York City.
OLTMANS understood that Vander JAGT had made this request in
receipt of a cable from the director of the airlines in Holland.
OLTMANS met VERRIPS in the Roosevelt Hotel, New York City. They
had a discussion of Indonesia and VERRIPS appeared to be attem-
pting to get in touch with Indonesian officials for Dutch in-
terests. OLTMANS advised that he learned from Vander JAGT, at
a later date, that VERRIPS had stated that OLTMANS could be
disposed of by the payment of $500 to a certain individual in
Harlem, who could kill OLTMANS with a truck. OLTMANS advised
this threat was published in Holland in articles written by
OLTMANS and that he lost contact with VERRIPS for some time due
to the publication of this matter.
:
[FBI Memorandum (New York), 10 December 1964 - DBA 94159.]
January 31 October 1961 :
A review of lists published by the United States Mission
to the United Nations, from January to 31 October 1961, entitled
"List of Non-U.S. Nationals Accredited as Correspondents and
Representatives of Information Media by the United Nations" fails
to reveal the name of OLTMANS as being an accredited correspon-
SECRET
dent to the United Nations.
[FBI FR (New York), 24 November 1961
8 April 1961
-
DBF 96245.]
Headquarters reports to the Federal Bureau of Investi-
gation that according to a fairly reliable source, OLTMANS
plans to visit East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hun-
gary during May, June, and July 1961. OLTMANS will be "un-
attached" and "Unsponsored", travelling alone and without any
specific prearranged itinerary.
His reputation at the United Nations leaves many ques-
tions unanswered. He is socially ostracized by the Dutch de-
legation and fellow Dutch newsmen at the United Nations for
his openly pro-Indonesian public stand in the question of
Dutch Guinew.
He is not permanently accredited to the United Nations.
Ostensibly he works for an obscure Dutch monthly magazine but
fellow Dutch correspondents say they have yet to see one story
written by OLTMANS in it.
When he applied some time ago for membership in the
United Nations correspondents Association, he could not pro-
duce a single clipping to demonstrate his journalistic activi-
tées.
:
:
OLTMANS claims he writes also for a syndicate in the
United States, the identity of which is unknown. His main in-
come seems to be derived from public lectures in the United
States on international politics, especially matters touching
on Asia in general and Indonesia sepcifically. He claims he
grew up in Indonesia and therefore knows the conditions there.
Despite the fact that his material does not seem to be
printed anywhere, OLTMANS travels extensively. He shuttles be-
tween Europe and the United States quite regularly (at least
once a year), was in the Congo last year, recently returned
from Cuba and now is planning a trip to Eastern Europe. Those
knowing his personal and financial status do not believe that
he could pay for all this even if his stories were selling.
OLTMANS is constantly seen with what a western source
SECRET
would call "the wrong crowd". He has excellent contacts with
all the communist-dominated countries, including Cuba. He is
on intimate terms with elements like the Guineans, Indonesians,
Egyptians, etc.
[CSCI-3/764,797 18 April 1961.]
15 April 1961 (date of article):
"What is activating Willem OLTMANS whose spirit made
itself felt during the last few days when LUNS had talks in
Washington? Is he 'an agent of SUKARNO?'
"The fact that he is continually hard up for cash is
an argument against this assumption. When he is in The Nether-
lands he is in the habit of getting free rides from city to
city. His many air trips were made possible by the fact that
he is married to a ground stewardess of an American aviation
company and consequently can travel virtually free of charge.
In recent years he is making his living by means of lectures
throughout the United States in behalf of the 'lecture office
Colston Leigh', and in this manner strongly influences Ameri-
can public opinion with regard to New Guinea. He himself says
'Whatever I do, write or say my only objective is to see
Dutch prestige restored in Indonesia'. But his presence, his
knowledge of Indonesian politics and politicians, his connec-
tions with Dutch trade and industry cannot be argued away. No
less than the fact that when LUNS carried on talks in Washington,
Kennedy appeared to be very well informed about the divergent
views of a number of Dutch politicians, financiers, and indus-
trialists, thanks to the reports which his special adviser
W. N. ROSTOW had received from OLTMANS."
[Haagse Post, 15 April 1961.]
19 April 1961
The American Embassy in The Hague forwarded information
to the Department stating that
"1. Dutch press has noted alleged April 9 statement of
Dutch journalist Willem OLTMANS in St. Joseph, Michigan, that
adviser to President Kennedy had told him that U.S. Seventh
SECRET
Fleet might become involved in Dutch-Indo dispute over New
Guinea. Press also subsequently noted White House denial of
any such statement to OLTMANS.
"2. Regarding foregoing Department may be interested
to know that OLTMANS, a contributor to Dutch left-wing weekly
Vrij Nederland, frequently lectures in US to various club au-
diences, etc. In reputable Dutch political and press circles
OLTMANS is generally viewed with disfavor because of his alle-
ged 'loose handling' of the truth. Embassy understands that
the Dutch Foreign Office had considerable record reflecting
unfavorably on OLTMANS' general behavior. It is known that
OLTMANS considers himself a warm and close personal friend
of SUKARNO (some say this is or was more than platonic) and
that he hold view that New Guinea should be ceded to Indonesia.
OLTMANS told reporting officer in May 1960 that he had recently
seeh SUKARNO in Vienna and that he, OLTMANS, was convinced that
hostilities regarding Karel Doorman visit were going to happen
and (presumably for this reason) US should give full support
to Indo policy re New Guinea. If one is to believe all un-
favorable remarks and aspersions one may hear about OLTMANS in
Netherlands, it may well be that he is actually in pay of SUKAR-
NO. If this true and if OLTMANS is as devious as pictured, it
is not impossible that his account of alleged White House state-
ment about possible US military involvement in New Guinea dispute
was deliberately made in order to produce expected denial. A
US denial of such a statement would on the balance appear help-
ful Indonesian cause as OLTMANS sees it. Embassy assumes OLTMANS
will attempt to see SUKARNO in US."
[Airgram no. G-462, 19 April 1961, from American Embassy, The
Hague.]
14 September 1961
:
OLTMANS addressed a letter to J. W. TWINAM, U. S Con-
sulate General, Amsterdam, in which he stated he was "writing
to you on behalf of Mr. Albert F. HILVERDINK, Jr., of Kwintheul-
straat 4, Amsterdam whom I have invited to visit the United
States as my personal guest." Paid for passage on the S.S.
S-CORE
Rotterdam leaving Rotterdam on 10 October 1961.
[Attachment B, ONHA 27828.1
14 September 1961
:
4
OLTMANS filed an apllication for a waiver of passport
and visa indicating that he went to East Berlin and Yugoslavia
for Broadcasting. Features, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, making a
series of broadcasts, and he was unaware of needing a visa be-
fore entering those territories. His waiver was granted on
14 September 1961.
[FBI FR (new York), 29 June 1962
14 September 1961
:
-
DBA 14523.]
OLTMANS admitted to the United States at New York.
[FBI FR (Washington), 30 January 1962 DBA 762.]
20 September 1961
By letter dated 20 September 1961, directed to the FBI,
Assistant Attorney General J. Walter YEAGLEY, of the Internal
Security Division, advised that OLTMANS was reportedly serving
as a paid lobbyist and public relations man for President
SUKARNO of Indonesia, in the United Nations. If it could be
established that OLTMANS was acting as a paid relations man for
SUKARNO, in the United States, he would be required to register
under the Foreign Agents Registration Act, unless his activities
in this connection are confined to the United Nations.
[FBI FR (New York), 24 November 1961 DBF 96245.]
:
16 November 1961
An FBI source advised on 16 November 1961 that the
occupant of apartment 1F (118-09 83rd Avenue, Kew Gardens,
New York), Willem OLTMANS, is apparently employed in some
capacity with the United Nations. According to the informant,
OLTMANS constantly makes trips in and around the United States
and overseas. He is separated or divorced from his wife, who
left him about a year and a half ago. The reason for departure,
according to rumor, is that "he is not a man". Informant stated
:
he was unaware as to whether OLTMANS was a homosexual or impo-
tent, but did state OLTMANS currently lives with a male Filipino
7
SECRET
and the impression is that his wife's depature was due to
the former reason rather than the latter.
[FBI FR (New York), 24 November 1961 - DBF 96246.]
22 November 1961
FBI's source advised that OLTMANS is believed to enjoy
close, personal relationships with leading Indonesian persona-
lities, including Foreign Minister SUBANDRIO.
[FBI FR (New York),