14-00000
104-10107-10134
10/N
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
SUBJECT: (Thomas Thomas Lee Roberts
03
OGC 69-0249
10 February 1969
RETURN TO CIA
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
and others
Mr.
(Milligan)
Leonard Newman, Chief
1. After meeting with Mr. Warner,
from the (LPGLOBE Staff, I telephoned Mr.
of the Rackets Section, New York County District Attorney's office,
on Thursday, 6 February, and stated that I wanted to discuss a
matter not directly related to the Itkin case. I felt it was
necessary to explain to Mr. Newman that it was not the Itkin
case since we have been enjoined by the U.S. Attorney's office
from discussing the Itkin case with members of Mr. Hogan's office.
Mr. Newman's immediate question was, "Does this involve (Robert"?
I said it did and would look forward to meeting with him at 10:30 °3
on Friday provided the weather permitted an on-time arrival in
New York.
2. At 10:30 on Friday, 7 February, I met with Mr. Newman
and Sergeant William Graf, a police investigator assigned to the
District Attorney's office to work on the Itkin case. It appears
that Sergeant Graf, in the course of his investigation of Itkin's
activities, came up with the information that (Roberts) was working
for CIA. When Sergeant Graf first talked to Mr. Newman about
this possibility, Mr. Newman thought he was jumping to conclusions
with insufficient evidence. However, Sergeant Graf continued his
investigation and more and more evidence pointed (Roberts) CIA
relationship. I specifically asked Sergeant Graf if Itkin was aware
of (Roberts) affiliation with CIA, and Sergeant Graf replied that
from the evidence he had seen of the Itkin Roberts) relationship
it was his opinion that Itkin does know of (Roberts affiliation with
CIA. Mr. Newman commented that if Itkin knew of Roberts)03
affiliation with CIA, we could be sure that this would be brought
out by Mr. F. Lee Bailey during the trial of Itkin.
Ju
3. At the present time the New York District Attorney is
not contemplating prosecution of Roberts as the information
uncovered to date relates Roberts) Contacts with Itkin and
apparently there are no specific criminal charges against
(Roberts) Sergeant Graf stated that (Roberts) had corresponded
with Itkin, and it was assumed that Itkin and (Roberts have met
personally when (Roberts) has been in this country. 03
ण्ड
12-10
034. Mr. Newman stated that they had sent questions to Dakar)
for Roberts) via Interpol which have been answered. Mr. Newman
stated that the FBI had advised him that the FBI had previously
had an interest in Roberts Mr. Newman did not state whether
the FBI had advised him of CIA's interest in (Roberts) 3 Mr. Newman
asked me whether we would be willing to question Roberts on other
items that they had uncovered. I stated that this posed a real
03.
problem and I was not able to give them an answer at that time.
I was concerned about certain conflicts in the event (Rob Roberts D03
answers involved information which could incriminate him.
might be that Roberts would consider he had immunity from
prosecution when answering questions put forth by CIA.
03
It
5. I did not describe (Roberts) relationship to CIA other than
to state he had in fact received some training from us and did
report to us. I intended to infer that (Roberts was an informant
in a similar capacity to that which Itkin enjoyed earlier.
6. It should be noted that all parties to the Itkin case are
talking to each other. Mr. Newman said two days before I called
on the phone the FBI advised him that CIA would discuss our
relationship with (Roberts) with him. Later that day in Mr.
Morgenthau's office, where I met Itkin, FBI Agent Donovan
commented that he heard I had a good meeting with Newman.
It is not beyond belief that the FBI told Itkin that I had seen
Newman about (Roberts)
03
02
CC: CCS/LPGLOBE
C/CI/R&A
JOHN K. GREANE
Assistant General Counsel

