14-00000
104-10233-10021
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SLOPET
23 Febuary 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR THE STATION
SUBJECT: Receipts and Other Documents Relating to Funds for
Underground in Cuba
1. Today Dr. Miro's secretary delivered to me the receipts
and other documents pertaining to the funds provided monthly
to the Revolutionary Goups of the CRC for support of the
Underground. She said she had been cautioned by Dr. Alvarez
DIAZ that they must be locked up most carefully.
2. Examination of these documents reveals that the Counci
financial section has kept complete records of amounts turned
over to groups of the Council and recepts for same; that these
recepts promise delivery in Cuba to the underground of the organi-
zation, report of deliver and return funds that cannot be deliverd
(See recepts Tab A) Tab B contains photostat of recepts presented
by the MRR for the month of November 1961, for purchases of
equipment and would not apply to the months of December 1961 and
January 1962 which were first two months in which CRC was pro-
vided directly with support funds for underground.
However, the
last item in Tab Bis a letter of December 1961 to RESCATE delegate
Mendez Pirez from Dr. Mario del CANAL Ferrer, assistant Secretary
general, describing bow $3500 peros were sent to Osvaldo RAMIREZ
in Escambray (after exchanging from dollars to pesos at 5.50)and
other amounts to others inside. Apparently they were sent to
DARIO the Becretary General of RESCATE, thru Dr. COSTALES
น
and HILDA (who received the funds). Mention is made of letters
of acknowledgment received and others that are expected.
14-00000
-2-
3. Tab C contains various letters from MDC to Dr. Alvarez
DIAZ, Finance Director of DRC enclosing photo copies of letters
received from Cuba intimating recept of "medicines", etc. There
is a letter to CRC attention Alvarez DIAZ from Ricardo LORIE
indicating how and to whom funds furnished him were delivered.
Tab D is a report from Montecristi of the receipts and disbursements
effected by that group from October 1961 thru January 16, 1962.
4. Tab E contains the reports of the 30 of November Group
and indludes receipts for purchases made for the underground and
of telegrams and other messages indicating receipts in coded
phraseology such as"Mi vida el regolito del Nino llego completo
Besos y abrazos, Mercedes". (My dear the present for the child
arrived complete. Hug and Kisses Mercedes.)
5. Tab F contains letters of transmittal and acknowledgment
of receipt from different individuals.
6. Tab G is a report from Union Democratica, Movimiento
20 de Maye, advising how delivery was made and also two letters
from Nino DIAZ as to his handling of funds furnished him.
7. Tab H has Ricardo LORIE's them reports of November,
December and January.
8. Tab I contains the February report from Pascasro LINERAS
of FORDC, with phto copies of the telegram and letter received
by him acknowledging receipt.
9. Although there are not many actual acknowledgments from
wiyhäinCuba included in this material, the sum total is such as
to give reasonable assurance of proper usage and delivery of the
SFOGET
14-00000
-3-
funds.
10. Copies of more acknowledgments from within Cuba will
be requsted in the next report from the Council.
SECRET
TFP

