124-10179-10219
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DECLASSIFICATION AUTHORITY DERIVED FROM:
FBI AUTOMATIC DECLASSIFICATION GUIDE
DATE 05-15-2023
BY: F54M93K42
The Attorney General
CONFIDENTIAL
Jaffe, a former correspondent for ABC and CBS
television networks, was an informant of our New York Office
from 1958 to 1981. During this period he furnished extensive
information on his numerous contacts with Soviet nationals when
he met through his assignment as a CBS correspondent at the
United Nations, New York, New York. In 1961 he was assigned
to Moscow, USSR, as a correspondent for ABC and served there
until he was expelled in 1965 following his reporting of infor
mation unfavorable to the Soviet Union. He thereafter was
transferred to Hong Kong where he served until 1968. According
to information from a former SIS officer currently residing in
the West, Jaffe in about 1961, while in Moscow, was recruited
by the Committee for State Security (KGB). Our investigation
regarding this allegation has failed to either substantiate
or refute this allegation. Jaffe, however, in 1963 reported
to our New York Office that while in Moscow, he was approached
in what he considered an attempt at recruitment by the SIS.
During interviews with Jaffe he denied any overt acts helpful
to the KGB, although he admitted a continuing relationship
with several KGB officers.

No information is contained in the files of the FBI
indicating Jaffe was ever reported on by Colonel Fenkovskiy.
With regard to his employment difficulties, this matter was
the subject of discussion with Jaffe on several occasions after
his return from Hong Kong in 1968, when he explained to Special
Agents in contact with him that he was experiencing difficulty
in finding a job and his concern that his association with the
FBI was the reason for this difficulty. On every occasion he
was assured that the FBI had not disclosed his confidential
relationship with the FBI. Jaffe in 1969 advised that he had
learned from a British intelligence service contact in Hong Kong
that his recall from that city by ABC was caused by his refusal
to cooperate with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). He
related that he later mentioned this to a CIA contact in
Washington who indicated that the British intelligence service
representative had no right to relate to Jaffe this information.
CONFIDENTIAL
The Attorney General
CONFIDENTIAL
The files of the FBI were reviewed to determine if
Jaffe's allegations had any foundation in fact and no informa
tion was contained therein supporting this allegation. His
observations concerning the change of attitude of FBI personnel
in dealing with him to one of coolness can be accounted for
on the basis of information received from the Soviet intelligence
officer alleging his recruitment by the KGB. Our relationship
with him thereafter was circumspect and undoubtedly he detected
a change in the Agents' attitude.

Whatever employment difficulties may have been encountered
by Jaffe did not arise out of any action taken by the FBI.
1 - The Deputy Attorney General
Attention: Michael E. Shaheen, Jr.
Special Counsel for
Intelligence Coordination
NOTE:
See memorandum W. A. Branigan to Mr. W. R. Wannall
dated August 14, 1975, captioned "Samuel Adason Jaffe,
Information Concerning."

Classified "Secret" since it discloses FBI interest
in Soviet nationals and in order to protect sensitive sources
of information.
Regarding W. A. Branigan to Mr. W. R. Wannall
memorandum dated August 14, 1975, Mr. Wannall commented
"Suggest memorandum to AG."
CONFIDENTIAL