124-10269-10343
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Classified 6283
Created by Dedasified by 1467
Ex
Date Declassification Inácii zute
97
SL/6/91
にベ
-OPTIONAL FUAM NO. 10
UNITED STATES COMENT SECRÉT
Memorandum
TO
:
DIRECTOR, FBI (134-5108)
ASAC, SAN FRANCISCO (134-1132)
FROM
:
SUBJECT:
Cos
CS SF 2279-S
-
CONFIDENTIAL SOURCE CHINESE
ReBulet 2/23/60..
"
DATE: 3/11/60
1
ok
Wilh
Judach
CIA
The following data is being furnished to the Bureau
concerning the operation of this source:
The operation of this source is secure from all
standpoints at this time. If this security becomes an issue
at any time in the future, the Bureau will be immediately
notified and the source will be discontinued until such time
as its security can be guaranteed.
As the Bureau is well aware, this source furnishes a
magnitude of vital information pertaining to activities within
Red China including its economical and industrial achievements.
For instance, during the past six months, this source continued
to furnish information relating to U.S. educated Chinese who have
since returned to Red China and identified their current positions
in their respective fields of science. This source also reveals
the intimate feelings which these Chinese scientists have
concerning life in China, as well as their pros and cons concerning
life and science in general, while studying and residing in the U.S.
A true picture of life in China today is also related by the
information which this source furnishes reflecting life in general
to be horrible due to the lack of proper food, housing, clothes,
equipment, and the complete disregard of a human person's
individual rights.
Source still continues to furnish up-to-date news
on the former Korean prisoners of war (turncoats) and their truc
feelings, both pro-Chinese communist and anti-US, as well as their
future plans Source reveals the identity of their friends in
the US as well as the current activities and residences of
these turncoats who have since returned from China (to the U.S
2.- Bureau (AM REG.)
1
-
SIF
PJH/1s
(3)
LOT
REC-23355
CX-130
MAR 14 1960
SECRET
Siti
NATZEKO
(SP 134-1132)
TJH/15
SECRET
Source has furnished complete subscription lists of
various Chinese communist publications, including "China
Reconstricts reking Review, " ""China Literature and other
leading pro-Chinese communist publications which are published
in Hong Kong, B.C. In this regard, source furnishes identities
of those individuals residing in the U.S. who act as agents for
these Chinese communist publications.
Source still continues to furnish up-to-date news
concerning American citizens who have pro-Chinese communist
sympathies residing on the Mainland of China. These Americans
in some way are employed by the Chinese Communist Government and
in particular, the source was able to locate the current
whereabouts of one VIRGINIUS FRANK COE, New York espionage subject
who has been missing since about 1956) This source continues to
furnish pertinent information also relative to the activities
and writings of ANNA LOUISE STRONG and her fight to have the
U.S. recognize Red China.
Tilin source continually furnishes the identitics of
many U.S. citizens who have violated the U.S. passport laws by
having actually traveled to and throughout Red China.
Source continually identifies certain U.S. scientists
who are on friendly terms with U.S. educated Chinese scientists
who have since returned to China) and at the same time, makes
available certain requests which these Chinese)scientists make
of their scientific friends in the U.S. In certain instances,
the Bureau has been able to develop potential double agents in
the Chinese security field, because of these requests made by
these Chinese scientists and in particular, San Francisco, makes
reference to the case of DR. Y.P. SUN a research chemist for
(Shell Development Corporation, Modesto, California It also
assists in evaluating the reliability of double agents as in the
case of RAYMOND TOM, who has been approached by representatives
of the New China News Agency) In Toil case, this source has
been able to corroborate information which (TOM has furnished
the Bureau.
In the counterintelligence field, this source continues
to monitor correspondence to one JAMES CHAO who resides in Ann
Arbor, Michigan) it being pointed out that (CHAO wan alleged to be
an actual agent for the (Bank of China the(Bank China) which is a Chinese
communist front.
Considerable data has been uncovered concerning pro-
(Chinese) communist sympathies on the part of U.S. Government
employees, thus causing the ficld and the Lureau to iritlate
140 SGE cases.
SECRET
(SF 1132)
PH/1s
SECRET
!
This source enables San Francisco. to keep up with the
current residences and employments of various San Francisco secur
and SI subjects and at the came time, source furnishes the view
points which these Subjects have concerning Red China, as well as
their anti-US statements which they have made.
Source has uncovered the whereabouts of a Selective
Servibe subject of the San Francisco Division, namely TONG Hing-
yip, who recently graduated from the University of Peking after
being missing from the San Francisco area for several years.
In other instances, this source has revealed several
Chinese security subjects to be now residing on the Mainland of
China and attending institutions of higher learning even
though US passports for these individuals have not been issued.
Source has identified certain U.S. scientists who have
traveled to Moscow, as oscow, as well as European countries, to attend
various scientific conferences there During these conferences,
gome of these .. soientists have become quite friendly wit
Chinese scientists and have initiated correspondence. Although
Some of these U.S. scientists have been contacted by the fieli
relative to their willingness to cooperate in the double-agent
field, San Francisco has no knowledge concerning the outcome.
Source still continues to furnish pertinent information
relating to various (CIA) subjects which information has been (2)
disseminated. Many of the U.S. educated (Chinese) scientists have
been approached the covers operation in San Francisco
as double agents by that fagency)
act
Source continually shows the techniques and pressure
put on Chinese) scientists remaining in the U.S. in order to force
them to return to (China) and work for the motherland In this
regard, source has given the U.S. valuable information conceming
the advancement which the Chinese communists have made in certain
scientific fields.
Source still continues to identify numerous U.S.
citizens who are in contact with various
communist publishing firms.
pus Hong Kong pro-Chinese
It has also furnished correct Chinese family names,
which reflect that Chinene individuals are residing in the U.3.
fraudulently and has also furnished e coaching papers" for individua
to use. It has also furnished data as to now finances may be sent
to Communist China through drops in Hong Kong and has also fummiste
information relative to the manner in which individuals are able כי
leave Communist China which which has been of assistance in evaluating
the stories which recent immigrants furnich during the cource of
interviews by Bureau agents.
SECREF
SF 134-132
PJH/1s
SECRET
1
.
Numerous potential security informants have been
developed due to the type of information which this source
has furnished in San Francisco.
Uponreceipt of the translations of the (Chinese) material
which is forwarded to the Bureau, as well as an evaluation made
of the English language material, which is photostated, San
Francisco furnishes to the other field divisions only that
material which can be construed as having intelligence value.
In manyinstances, San Francisco has knowledge concerning the
identities of security subjects residing within other field
divisions and furnishes pertinent data concerning these individuals
Numerous requests are made by certain Chinese) scientists to formari
to them certain technical books and publications in the
scientific field which information is also furnished to other
field divisions.
In the case of (Caucasians) traveling throughout (Red
China, who may possibly be U.S. citizens, this data is also
furnished to other ofrices.
At this time, this source as a general rule has access
to all mail emanating from (Hong Kong, B.C.C. and Communist China)
destined for the U.S; however, on certain gccasions, this source,
due to the routing of mail by the Post Office from the Airport,
sometimes misses certain mail bags.
For the Bureau's information, San Francisco processes
approximately 13,500 first class letters a day not including
third class publications. In this connection; however, it is
noted that the processing must be done in a very limited time,
two hours maximum. Furthermore, in view of the existing
limitations, the quantity of material chosen for complete
translation is necessarily limited to no more than 50 per day,
some of which as further time permis for a closer scrutiny, is
later disrnrded and no further action taken, other than
returning the material to the source.
!
SECRET