157-10005-10225
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10005-10225
RECORDS SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: R891
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR: SSCIA
FROM :
TO :
TITLE :
TESTIMONY/REPORT OF PROCEEDINGS WITH EXHIBITS
DATE: 08/12/75
PAGES: 90
SUBJECTS :
TESTIMONY OF HOUSTON, LAWRENCE RE: CIA AND CASTRO
EXHIBITS ARE INCLUDED
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : T
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 10/01/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
BOX 248-02
COMMENTS:
NW 50955 DocId: 32202415 Page 1
Date: 10/01/93
Page: 1
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
Bx 36
TOP SECRET
18
1
Niarchos' ship captains named Katopodes brought a libel action
2
3
I believe it was, against Onassis for some letter he had written
about some activities of Katapodes, I can't remember the
4
details now.
5
We didn't know where this was leading.
So this was in
6
the Supreme Court of New York State, and so I went to a fellow
7
8
9
10
I knew in the U.S. Attorney's office and asked him if he
could keep track of how this suite was developing to see if
it was leading into some of the connections we had, par-
ticularly with Niarchos.
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
And he got some of the pleadings and some of the pre-
trial evidence
Mr. Wides. But you don't recall any contacts between
the Agency and the Justice Department resulting in Mr. Yeagley
going up to try and halt some aspects of the grand jury
proceedings in New York growing out
Mr. Houston.
It strikes no valve.
Mr. Wides. Let me ask just one more question in this
19
20
area and then we will move on to the document I asked you to
look at before we started.
21
Mr. Maxwell.
I have just one other question.
22
Mr. Wides
27
TOP SECRET
19
Do you recall that incident and the eventual denouement
of the affair?
Mr. Houston I cannot remember the exact chronology.
I had thought they had gotten the report on the problem a
little earlier than you suggested.
But can't argue it.
It was a confused picture. All sorts of interpersonal feelings
TOP SECRET
20
that I recall were going on out there. And Ithink one of the
And I said, there is no particular problem, because
there is nothing we can do about it because there is no crime
against the U.S. that I can find in this situation, it is a
crime against
And Allen said, that well may be. But I still think
that I want to report this to Justice.
So, I did prepare a report and delivered it to
can't remember-- probably to the Assistant Attorney General,
Criminal Division, who ever it was.
They said to the effect, thank you, that ist. There
is nothing we can do.
Mr. Wides.
Was there any discussion of the possibility
TOP SECRET
21
Mr. Wides. Did you have another question in this area?
Mr. Maxwell.
I just wanted to say, if you wanted to
continue, you said there were three cases that eliminated the
TOP SECRET
22
kind of cases which CIA had with Justice, and the referrals,
and you had gone through one. And I wondered if you wanted
to go through the other two.
Mr. Houston. All right.
The second one was quite an interesting one. If I give
it in too much detail, excuse me.
Mr. Maxwell.
Off the record.
(Discussion off the record.)
Mr. Maxwell. Back on therecord.
Mr. Houston.
all of a
sudden disappeared from his post, and there was indication
that he had with him a considerable sum of money, something
in the nature of $30,000, I can't remember the exact amount.
This was promptly reported, and he disappeared into the blue.
The
started looking into it. And I believe we
sent people over to try and look into it, and found that
there had been a serious family problem between himself and his
wife.
Finally,
in Mexico we got
to the
word that this fellow was near Mexico City, and he passed word
through a lawyer that he had written all the
operational details of what he had been engaged in
which again were very sensitive, sealed them, and put them
in a vault which only thelawyers could get at, with instruc-
tions to his lawyers that if anything happened to him, no
TOP SECRET
29
The SEC, as a result has raised some questions with Justice
between our justice and our statutory problems. This is
before Justice now.
Mr. Wides. Is there a file in the OGC office generally
regarding, not necessarily every one, but many of your
which would contain many or most of OGC contacts with
Administrative agencies over the years?
Mr.Houston. No, because they weren't
there probably
is a substantial file on relations with Internal Revenue.
But those were to a large part either working out our own
tax equations on our own personnel with cover problems which
you probably know about, or the CAT situation, or Southern
Air Transport, and not interferring with IRS prosecutions,
although several times we were involved here is the type of
case I guess you are talking about.
What is the fellow out in the Philippines
I think his
name is Stonehill-
who had one of the biggest tax assess-
ments made against an individual made against him, I think,
$2 million? And Stonehill very definitely tried to involve
us in his defense. There was some connection with Stonehi 11
in the Philippines, you couldn't be in the Philippines without
some connection with them. And yet gave IRS the full in-
formation, and said, don't bother with us, we are not
concerned.
Mr. Wides. What about such things as the contacts with
TOP SECRET
55
Mr. Houston.
It was a memo of DITEL's that I saw.
I think it was dated after I left. I saw it in draft after-
ward.
It had to do, I recall, with operations in the Trust
Territories.
Mr. Wides.
In other words, the first category of issue
that I mentioned?
Mr. Houston.
Yes.
Mr. Wides. With regard to MH MUTUAL, which is a topic
that w
obviously don't have time to discuss fully today and
we have not yet seen the files, I wonder
and Mr. Maxwell
was going to pursue this, and I may be back
if you could
give me a rough idea during the period when it was under your
stewardship of the organizational chart, as it were, for the
TOP SECRET
56
TOP SECRET
57
TOP SECRET
58
Mr. Houston.
There were about two or maybe three recom-
mendations from the Investment Counsel we had at the time we
were turned down
Mr. Wides Excuse me.
Was the Investment Counsel the
person you were referring to?
Mr. Houston. No, this was an outside investment
counsel we retained for advice for a period of time.
TOP SECRET
59
So, finally, we decided that while we had gone to him
for a good reason, that is, so we could show that we had
relied on outside counsel of known stature, that it was
not fair either to him or to us to be in circumstances where
we were really secondguessing him through our own intermal
proçedures and our own invetment sort of Board of Directors.
So we left, I hope, on friendly terms.
Mr. Wides.
About when was that?
Mr. Houston.
Let me guess at around 1969, something
TOP SECRET
60
like that.
Mr Wides. Up until then as far as you know there
was no investment of Agency funds that were made as a result
of any decisions or implications within the CIA which might
then have been run by him for his independent advice but might
have originated on prompted within the Agency?
Mr. Houston.
There may have been those You see,
on our Board of Directors to which we referred all basic in-
vestment decisions we had three of our top economists, and
at least one of them was a member of a couple of college
investment boards, so that they had the benefit of the advice
to those university investment counsel.
Mr. Wides. Was he a consulting economist or a member--
Mr. Houston. A member of the staff.
Mr. Maxwell.
Mr. Houston. Yes.
Mr. Wides.
And her relationship with the university
board was what, as an alumni?
Mr. Houston.As an alumni. She was called as a
consultant on their investment program.
We also had the advice of a couple of friendly banks,
and at least a couple of insurance companies would freely
give us the benefit of their investment policies.
TOP SECRET
61
Discussion off the record.)
Mr Houston.
To go back to the start it may have
already been told
back in the last fifties we found in
the OGC office that the hardest thing to cope with were bene-
fits for death or disability insured under covert circumstan-
ces, particularly when, as so often happened, no prior planning
had been made for this
Even the prior planning is diffi-
cult, because if you are going to put an agent into certain
circumstances, and say you will get him insurance through
Mutual of Omaha, if the circumstances of the Department are
later known to Mutual of Omaha, they might say, well, that
is not a risky cover, and continually you wouldn't have
your insurance.
So, we came to the conclusion that we needed our own in-
surance business, and we started by buying two very small
off-shore insurance companies, and started writing death and
health policies. Now, the business grew quite rapidly to
cover all sorts of covert operations. And we went to two
large outside insurance companies and asked if they would
cooperate and take some of the policies either on a fully pro-
tected basis from us, or if they saw fit, for their own account.
And both of them did both. They would take some risks for
their own account, and the only thing we would ask is that
they protect the investigation in case it got into sensitive
fields.
TOP SECRET
62
In others they would ostensibly take the risk and we
would stand behind them.
Mr. Wikes. So that was indemnification?
Mr. Houston. Complete indemnification. And by and
large this arrangement worked extremely well.
Mr. Wikes. Sosthose were the kinds of insurance companies
were were talking about that would give us the benefit of
their investment?
Mr. Houston. Both of them had large investment portfolios
of their own, and feel I gave us access to their investment
manager, who were most cooperativen what they were invest-
ing.
Mr. Wikes. And what was the point of contact in the
Agency during that period for the insurance companies?
Mr. Houston. I went in both cases to set up the ori-
ginal contact, and then this project officer was the
primary.
Mr. Wikes. And he would have been the point of contact
for receiving their investment views?
Mr. Houston.
He or his office.
Mr. Wides.
And you mentioned also a bank as an out-
side source.
Mr. Houston.
There were a couple of banks, but one
particularly.
We kept some of the money on deposit with this
bánk.
TOP SECRET
63
The bank at our
request gave us a flat guarantee of repayment no matter what
on these assets. So, we felt well protected on this. And also,
when we deposited with them the certificates of deposit we
got the normal prime rate on our deposits. And here again
they particularly in the field of Eurobonds had some good
advice, and we also went to another brokerage house in
New York who had investment advisory staff that specialized in
Eurobonds.
So far as I know, they did not know the Agency
was involved, but they gave advice on the best interest rates
in Eurobonds and certificates.
It was a highly specialized
field.
Mr. Maxwell. Who was going to the investment house, the
project officer?
Mr. Houston. The project officer
Mr. Wides. Do you recall any dealings with Suydam and Com-
pany?
Mr. Houston. Now I have been asked time and time again
about Suydam Company, and the only thing I knew was from
personal knowledge going back to a trust my sister has an
interest in in the Guaranty Trust. They had one of these hold-
ing companies which I think was called Suydam and Company. But
you never heard who was it? I know. One of our directors
being asked by contact with Suydam and Company.
And he said
TOP SECRET
64
that is the only one he knows, was the Guaranty Trust.
There
was someone else, I don't know about it.
Mr. Wides.
Getting back to the question I alluded
to while we were off the record, did any questions arise about
whether the people on the board, the investment board, or manag-
ing board of Mutual who were from within the Agency, would
have access to economic intelligence or political intelli-
gence relevant to their own thinking on investments, and
Mr. Houston, The members of the board were always free
to bring up their ideas for investments, particularly in the
stock field, until more recent years. But mainly we were
consulting the economic experts for their general economic knowl-
edge on trends and any input they could give on basic invest-
ment policies.
Mr. Wides. That would include, I assume, economic in-
telligence regarding, for example, the trend of whether there
was likely to be a copper shortage, or the trend of
whether there was likely to be more nationalization of rubber
plantations or oil?
How would you differentiate that from economic intelli-
gence except that it would be
Mr. Houston. Because our investments, except for the
Eurobonds, were almost entirely in U.S.investments. And
while these were trained economists, their main professional
TOP SECRET
65
interest was in the foreign field. And I don't remember them
staying for instance, let's get into copper, it is going to
be in very short supply in Peru or whatever. I don't remember
any discussion of that sort.
Mr. Wides Do you recall any policy papers or reviews
generally as to the use of Agency knowledge in the broadest
sense of its intelligence fund in regard to the investment
decisions as distinct from decisions that were generated wholly
by outside?
Mr. Houston.
There were various basic general policy
papers
usually I would prepare them and put them before
the board
--
in which this may have been touched on. I don't
recall it specifically.
Mr. Maxwell.
The source of funds invested under the
auspices of the board were what?
In other words, all these companies that we had in
this insurance complex appeared to have the substance and
insraance.company would be expected to have.
Actually, the
whole fund for all of them was managed as a central fund under
this one project officer. On the design and organizational
TOP SECRET
66
chart it looked very complicated. In operation it was quite
simple. It was handled really as one entity with various faces
appearing.
And the complications of those whereby maintaining
your directors who took no part in the operation, your companies
directors, and things, and keeping your letterhead straight
for your writing for the different companies.
Mr. Maxwell.
Were there other sources of funds,
profits
in stock or bond transactions that
went back into the investment fund?
Mr. Houston.
They would all go into the central in-
vestment fund, and in the initial stages, particularly where
there was income from funds and dividends
until the stock
market broke there were some capital gains registered.
Then
the investment policy went more and more, particularly as
the interest rate went up, in the Eurobonds and certificates
of deposit, where for a while you were getting I think we
got a weighted average of over 11 percent. And then those
would go back into the fund against the insurance loss account-
ability. The most difficult thing we had was trying to
decide what was enough, because there was no actuarial exper-
ience such as in a nominal insurance company.
Mr. Wides. You mean the capitalization of particular
companies against insurance?
Mr. Houston. Exactly.
Mr. Wides.
TOP SECRET
67
Mr. Wides. With regard to the investment, in the case
of certificates of deposit abroad I take it that is what you
are referring to as the weighted average, when you weighted
Eurodollars Eurobonds and certificates of deposit.whatever
the form, were some of the investments in foreign countries made
in any way in consultation with the operating divisions in
regard to the non-investment aspects of the loan, if you will,
TOP SECRET
68
Mr.Houston. No.
Let us get one thing straight. The certificate of depo-
sit were domestic.
Mr. Wides Were there any foreign loans?
Mr. Houston. There were no foreign loans that I recall.
The Eurodollar bonds were in the case those which were guaranteed
by a U.S. company.
I can't even be sure of that, but my recollection is by and
large of subsidiaries of U.S. companies which do not guarantee
their subsidiary bonds
Mr. Wides. Thank you.
Mr. Maxwell. I wouldlike to go through some of the
material in the Olsen case. And I have marked as Houston
Exhibit 5 the excerpts from the IG's diary which I showed you
before.
(The document referred to was
marked Houston Exhibit No. 5
for identification.)
TOP SECRET