157-10008-10252
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification I orm
Agency Inform tion
AGENCY:
SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10008-10252
RECORD SERIES :
REPORT W/COVER MEMORANI UM
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Date: 2/23/201
Document Info nation
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
MILLER, WILLIAM
TO:
MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEI
TITLE:
STAFF REPORT ON ASSASSINA [IONS: AUTHORITY AND CONTROL
DATE:
07/09/1975
PAGES:
73
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA:
CIA AUTHORITY
INDERFURTH, RICK
LEGAL AUTHORITY
MILLER, WILLIAM
PRELIMINARY STAFF PAPER
"ASSASSINATIONS: AUTHORIT & CONTROL"
SPECIAL GROUP
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Unclassified
Redact
08/08/1994
COMMENTS: BOX 439-2
v9.1
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 1
24
-14-
TOP SECRET
Castro's life. The following exchange w: th Richard Helms makes this
point:
Senator Hart of Michigan. You tell us that it is your
impression that nothing done with respect to Castro by
the Agency was done without authority.
Do I understand that correctly'
Mr. Helms. It was done within the guidelines of ap-
propriate authority. In other words, we felt that we
were operating as we were supposed to operate, that
these things if not specifically authorized at least
were authorized in general ternS. (Helms testimony, p. 61)
Senator Baker. Was it in your view the general policy of
the government of the United Sates as proposed to be
implemented by the CIA to kill Fidel Castro?
Mr. Helms. I believe it was the policy at the time to
get rid of Castro and if killing him was one of the things
that was to be done in this connection, that was within
what was expected.
Another witness, Samuel Halpern, reated to the Committee a dis-
cussion he had had with Richard Bissell, who was then Deputy Director
Plans, concerning a meeting Bissell had attended in the Cabinet Room
of the White House:
Mr. Halpern. Mr. Bissell said he had recently--and he didn't
specify the date or the time--ne had recently been chewed
out in the Cabinet Room of the White House by both the Presi-
dent and the Attorney General or, as he put it, sitting on
his ass and not doing anything about getting rid of Castro
and the Castro regime. His orders to both Mr. Zogbey and to
me were to plan for an operation to accomplish that end.
Mr. Schwarz. Was any content out into the term "get rid of,"
or was that the term that was used, and only that term?
Mr. Halpern. To the best of my recollection, that was it.
There was no limitation of any kind. Nothing was forbidden,
and nothing was withheld. And the objective was to remove
Castro and his regime. (Halpen testimony, p. 8)
It is clear that the U.S. Governmen wanted to see the removal of
the Castro regime from Cuba and that the CIA took steps, including
-
-
-
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 2
-32-
TOP SECRET
Chairman Church. Deputy Director for Plans.
Your record shows that Helms had knowledge of the ZRRIFLE
operation, which, among other hings, was to develop an
executive capability--whatever that means. Presumably
that means a capability to conduct an assassination if
and when authorized by proper uthority?
Mr. Breckinridge.
That is my understanding.
Chairman Church. Is that your understanding?
Mr. Breckinridge. Yes, sir.
Chairman Church. Do your reco: ds show that, or is that
based upon what has been revealed through your interroga-
tion?
Mr. Breckinridge. First, let me go back and clarify,
then I will answer this question, if I may.
Mr. Helms approved ZRRIFLE, which the record shows has
the responsibility of stealing codes, essentially.
-
My understanding, from my interviews, is that ZRRIFLE
had also the responsibility for executive action capability.
That is a difficult phrase.
The record does not show that r. Helms knew when he
approved the project that it had this dual role.
(Colby testimony, pp. 66-67, 69-70)
William Harvey confirmed the fact that he had been given the responsibility
of developing the ZRRIFLE project by Mr. Bissell.
Mr. Schwarz. Now, did you have a conversation with
Mr. Bissell at some point in wł ich Mr. Bissell asked
you to investigate a capability for Executive Action?
Mr. Harvey. Yes.
Mr. Schwarz. In any event, some time in early '61?
Mr. Harvey. Yes.
Mr. Schwarz. What did Mr. Bissell ask you to do?
-
Mr. Harvey. He brought up the question of Executive
Action. He said he was concerned about it--about not
only our capabilities, if any, to perform it, but the
basic questions of protections, methods, techniques,
decisions, judgment as to its advisability in any given
case, and this whole sort of panoply of--again, pardon
NH 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 3
-37-
TOP SECRET
Lumumba
The Select Committee has not been al le to determine any direct
link between the CIA and the death of Pa: rice Lumumba. It has, how-
ever, heard testimony to the effect that an official within the CIA
directed a subordinate to investigate the possibility of assassinating
Lumumba; that a lethal virus was transfered to the Congo (now Zaire)
apparently for the purpose of killing Lumumba; that a foreigner was
recruited for a mission in the Congo, with assassination being originally
part of this mission; and that President Eisenhower may have ordered,
at least indirectly, an attempt to be made on the life of Lumumba.
Investigating the Possibility
The CIA official directly involved n investigating the possibility
of assassinating Lumumba was Richard Bissell, who was, at that time,
Deputy Director Plans. The following exchange refers to a discussion
Mr. Bissell had with Justin O'Donnell, tlen Deputy Chief of Staff, in
the DDP.
Mr. Schwarz. Did you ask himn words or substance to
kill Mr. Lumumba?
Mr. Bissell. I asked him to investigate the possibility
and to make explanation for so doing.
Mr. Schwarz. When did you do that?
I may
Mr. Bissell. I don't remember the date of that.
have it on a chronology here, lut I image that is a
matter of record, or that he has testified to that date.
I don't remember the date.
Mr. Schwarz. Did you tell him this connection with
making plans to go see the passer of the poison,
Mr. Gottlieb?
Mr. Bissell. I think I probably did.
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 4
-38-
TOP SECRET
Mr. Schwarz. Did he tell you he wouldn't do it?
Mr. Bissell. Later he told me that he didn't want
to do it. But he also said that he thought it was
an inappropriate action, and that the desired object
could be accomplished better in. other ways.
Mr. Schwarz. Who authorized you to tell Mr. O'Donnell
to take steps to move toward a sassinating Mr. Lumumba?
Mr. Bissell. Nobody.
Mr. Schwarz. Did you inform the White House of that?
Mr. Bissell. No.
Mr. Schwarz. To the best of your knowledge, did any-
body inform the White House of that?
Mr. Bissell. To the best of my knowledge, no.
Mr. Schwarz. Why did you seek to assassinate Mr.
Lumumba?
I told
-
Mr. Bissell. I didn't seek to assassinate him.
a member of the clandestine service to make plans and
develop the capability to do so if it were approved and
ordered.
Senator Goldwater. Approved by whom?
Mr. Bissell. It would have then had to have approval
at the highest level of government.
The Chairman. Where did the idea come from?
Mr. Bissell. I don't remember Mr. Chairman. It could
possibly have been mine.
The Chairman. It could possibly have been yours?
Mr. Schwarz. Did you tell Rostow that was your initiative?
Mr. Bissell. I told him that the instruction as to O'Donnell
was my initiative.
Senator Baker. How many others did you plan on, just as
a contingency?
How many other people did you: nstruct to draw up plans
to assassinate?
Mr. Bissell. I don't believe there were any others which
went to the point of instructing that a man be prepared.
(Bissell testimony, June 11, p.54-55)
-
NH 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 5
-39-
TOP SECRET
In his testimony before the Select Committee, Mr. O'Donnell
confirmed Mr. Bissell's account.
I
Mr. O'Donnell. And so he called me in and he told
me he wanted me to go down to he Belgian Congo, the
former Belgian Congo, and to eiminate Lumumba.
would also like to add the cau ion that any remarks
I may make about Mr. Bissell or anybody else that it
is all indirect discourse. When I say, Mr. Bissell
said go to the Congo, please do not include quotation
marks, go to the Congo. It's All Mr. Bissell said,
that he wanted me to go to the Congo.
Mr. Wides. What did you understand him to mean by
eliminate?
Mr. O'Donnell. To kill him and thereby eliminate his
influence.
Mr. Wides. What did you say to him?
Mr. O'Donnell. I told him tha: I would absolutely
not have any part of killing Lamumba. He said, I
want you to go over and talk t› Sidney Gottlieb--
And I went over--he was Dr. Botlieb at the time and
since--and he told me, I told him I had been sent
by Mr. Bissell, and he told me that there were four
or five--and I use the word four or five advisedly,
I'm not just saying three or four, as I recall one
of the methods was a virus and the others included
poison.
And I just felt at the time that with Gottlieb, don't
argue with him.
Mr. Wides. He told you there were four or five what?
What did he say to you?
Mr. O'Donnell. Let me say lethal means of disposing
of Lumumba. I then left his o fice and I went back
to Mr. Bissell's office and I told him in no way
would I have any part in the assassination of Lumumba.
Mr. Wides. Before you go on any further, did you or
he mention whether there was any higher authority than
Mr. Bissell for this operation either Mr. Dulles or
outside of the CIA at the Pres dential level?
Mr. O'Donnell. No, sir, in no way. I felt--again,
this has to be tenuous--but I certainly would not
have done it if I thought Mr. Dulles was opposed to
it.
-
-
-
-
NH 47129 DocId:32203760 Page 6
-40-
TOP SECRET
Mr. Wides. You assumed--
Mr. O'Donnell. I assumed that he had authority from
Mr. Dulles in such an importan issue, but it was not
discussed, nor did he purport to have higher authority
to do it.
Mr. Wides. Did you then, afte speaking to Mr. Bissell,
speak to anyone else that even ng about this request and
your reactions?
Mr. O'Donnell. Yes, sir.
An! I went into Mr. Helms'
office, and I said, Dick, here is what Mr. Bissell
proposed to me, and I told him that I would under no
conditions do it, and Helms sad you're absolutely
right.
Now, again, indirect discourse
absolutely right. And I felt
man who was on record as far a.
(O'Donnell testimony, June 9 p.
He told me that I was
hat then I had a senior
my position was concerned.
11-16)
The Lethal Vi us
Shortly after his conversation with Mr. Bissell, Mr. O'Donnell
went to the Congo. Upon his arrival, he discovered that a virus had,
in fact, arrived in the Congo and was in the possession of the CIA
Station Chief.
Mr. Wides. Shortly after that did you, in fact, go to
the Congo?
Mr. O'Donnell. I went, I would guess, within 48 hours.
Mr. Wides. You were there for about three months, the
last quarter of 1960, approxim tely?
Mr. O'Donnell. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Wides. The Station Chief as who at that time?
Mr. O'Donnell. Mr. Larry Devl:n, a very fine, dedicated
person. Mr. Devlin indicated to me that there was a
virus in the safe.
Mr. Wides. Did he indicate it was a lethal virus?
Mr. O'Donnell. He did not, but I knew it wasn't for
somebody to get his polio shot up to date.
(O'Donnell testimony, June 9, 1. 16)
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 7
-41-
TOP SECRET
The Select Committee has been unable to determine how the virus
found its way to the Congo and for what se it was intended. The
Committee has reason to believe the viru was ultimately returned to
Agency headquarters in Washington.
A Clue to Presidential Involvement
The discussion between Mr. Bissell and Mr. O'Donnell, as well as
the arrival of the lethal virus in the Congo, occurred during the fall
of 1960. The Select Committee has heard the testimony of one witness
who remembered a National Security Counc 1 meeting in the summer of
1960 in which President Eisenhower made eference to his desire to see
Lumumba eliminated. This witness, Rober: Johnson, made it clear to the
Committee that what he had heard at this meeting should be considered
"a clue, rather than precise evidence of Presidential involvement."
Mr. Johnson. What I am going to tell you should be
understood clearly for what it is--a clue, rather
than precise evidence of Presidential involvement
in decision making with respec: to assassinations.
I would be extremely concerned if I felt that this
information were to be the bass in itself for
conclusions by this committee or if it were other-
wise to be made public.
As a member of the NSC staff during the Eisenhower
Administration, I sometimes at ended meetings of
the National Security Council o take notes on the
discussion.
I attended one such NSC meetin;; in the summer of
1960. I should note parenthet cally that I have
refreshed my memory as to the probable time of
the meeting by checking the historical record of
international developments. A that meeting, there
was a discussion of developmens of what was then
the Congo, now Zaire.
At some time during that discussion President Eisen-
hower said something--I can no longer remember his
words--that came across to me as an order for the
assassination of Lumumba who was then at the center
-
NỮ 47129 DocId:32203760 Page 8
-42-
TOP SECRET
of political conflict and controversy in the Congo.
There was no discussion; the meeting simply moved on.
I remember my sense of that mon ent quite clearly
because the President's statement came as a great
shock to me. I cannot, however, reconstruct the
moment more specifically. (Robert Johnson testimony,
June 18, pp. 5-6)
Concluding Remark
In his testimony before the Select (ommittee, Director Colby had
this to say about U.S. involvement in the death of Patrice Lumumba:
Mr. Colby. There are a series of other charges,
Mr. Chairman, about assassination that have been
made about CIA in the past, of Mr. Lumumba. There
is no question about it that at one point there
was a low level discussion that maybe that would
be something that should be dor e. There is an in-
dication that a foreigner was recruited to go down
there, but our records very clearly indicate that
his function turned entirely ir to other activities
of trying to penetrate a code room, and things of
that nature, and there is no irdication of any
attempt by us to engage in an assassination of
Mr. Lumumba. He was actually assassinated by some
Congolese forces. Clear, that we have absolutely
nothing to do with, so the Lumumba case I think we
can absolutely say we had nothing to do with the
Lumumba case. (Colby testimony, May 15, p. 65)
-
-
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 9
-58-
TOP SECRET
October 6, 1961: McCone Cable Regarding Assassination
Mr. Kirbow. The record before the Committee indicates
that Smith reported that he had recommended to Ambas-
sador Lodge that "We do not se ourselves irrevocably
against the assassination plot since the other two
alternatives mean either a bloodbath in Saigon or a
protracted struggle which couli rip the army and the
country asunder."
Mr. McCone directed by cable to Saigon of 6 October--
"McCone directs that you withdraw recommendation to
Ambassador concerning assassination plan under McCone
instructions as we cannot be in position actively con-
doning such course of action and thereby engaging our
responsibility therefor."
Senator Schweiker. Would you explain what that means?
Mr. Colby. What that means?
It means we don't want
to have anything to do with an assassination plan.
Senator Huddleston. You are eliminating that as an
alternative?
Mr. Colby. That is part of ou: concept of what to do.
Senator Schweiker. Didn't tha: contradict what you
were saying a few minutes ago? Didn't you say we
were in essence--
Mr. Colby. We were looking to the overthrow of the
government.
Senator Schweiker. I see what you are saying.
Mr. Colby.
But not the assass nation in this case of
the brothers Nhu and Kahn.
Senator Schweiker. The other went forward?
Mr. Colby. The other program continued, yes.
(Colby testimony, June 20, pp. 12-14)
U.S. Involvement
President Diem was assassinate. November 2, 1961. The CIA
was not involved in the actual murder. Director McCone's directive
against participation in any assassination attempts or plots, sent to
-
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 10
-44-
TOP SECRET
Mr. Colby. This is a memorandum written after a
debriefing of our Ambassador there. And the de-
briefing apparently covered the conversation, which
indicated that the dissidents did need guns and
ammunition from the U.S., and articularly they
needed a small number of high-powered rifles with
telescopic lenses.
The Ambassador said he saw no roblem in the pur-
chase and delivery clandestine y of the arms for
the dissidents, but he said, o course, this raises
the question of whether the U.S. Government wants
to engage in this activity.
And our officer said that this is, of course, a
policy decision, the CIA could deliver the arms,
if this is the group we want to support.
Mr. Schwarz. In June of 1960 (id the government
state that policy decision, and state that the
government of the U.S. was prepared to participate
in the overthrow of the Trujilo regime to the
following extent:
"To provide a small number of sniper rifles or
other devices for the removal of key Trujillo
people from the scene?"
Mr. Colby. Yes.
Mr. Schwarz. And who made tha decision on behalf
of the U.S. Government?
Mr. Colby. Well, we have a memorandum that in-
dicates that that was told to he Chief of our
Western Hemisphere Division by the doctorant
Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs.
Mr. Schwarz. Who was then Mor Pottom?
Mr. Colby Mr. Rubottom.
Mr. Schwarz. In July of 1960 lid General Cabell,
the Acting DCI, accept the recommendation made by
the CIA staff and concurred in by Mr. Richard Helms,
that 12 U.S. rifles, model 1903, with telescopic
sights, be sent to underground opposition forces
in the Dominican Republic?
Mr. Colby. Yes. The proposal was to procure
and deliver them by air, parachuting them into
the country.
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 11
-45-
TOP STORE
If they could not be delivered by air, they were
planning for a way in which those weapons could
be delivered by sea. And ther was a considerable
discussion of ways to get it it.
Mr. Breckinridge.
There was no delivery.
Mr. Colby. And there was neve a delivery of those
particular weapons.
Mr. Schwarz. Going back to the reference to the
Assistant Secretary of State who authorized the
delivery of the rifles on beha. f of the U.S. Govern-
ment, who authorized his makin, that statement?
Mr. Colby. I don't think we know.
The Chairman. Under your procedure, if you receive
an order from the Assistant Secretary of State to
send rifles into a Latin American country, or any
other foreign country, for the purpose that we have
discussed that the record discoses, is that a suf-
ficient authority on which the CIA would then take
action?
Mr. Colby. No, I don't believe it is. Certainly
it is not under our present rules. And I think at
that time it is really quite unlikely, in my opinion,
that that approval could have leen given by the
Assistant Secretary acting alone unless he was
acting under a general delegat: on of authority to
approve details of a larger idea that had been dis-
cussed even orally at the senior levels.
Now, I don't think we have any record of those dis-
cussions.
Mr. Schwarz. Do you have any doubt that the policy
question referred to and the question "Whether the
U.S. Government wants to engage in this activity"
refers to the use of such weapons for the purpose
of killing people, assassinating people?
Mr. Colby. Killing people, yes.
another word, unfortunately.
Assassinating is
The Chairman. Killing is the letter word.
1
NW 47129 DocId:32203760 Page 12
-46-
TOP SECR
Mr. Colby. Yes. But assassination has a slightly
different meaning. But I thin. that in particular
quotation of page 22 there is very clearly reflection
of the thought process that I was explaining, that
the CIA could do it if it had policy approval to
do it. And we don't know where that policy approval
actually came, except from the Assistant Secretary.
(Colby testimony, June 4, pp. 7-40)
January, 1961: Special Group Decision
Mr. Schwarz. In 1961, January 12, 1961, did the
Special Group approve a recommendation made apparently
by the Department of State tha: limited supplies of
the small arms and other materials to be made avail-
able for dissidents inside the Dominican Republic?
Mr. Colby. Our records do indicate a memorandum that
the Special Group did explain, did approve that on
January 12th--
Mr. Schwarz. January 12, 1961, and January 24, 1961
confirmed?
Mr. Colby. The 24th, really, I think it was discussed
on the 12th and-
Mr. Schwarz.
They approved it on the 12th and con-
firmed it on the 24th?
Mr. Colby. Right.
The Chairman. The Special Group being--
Mr. Colby. The predecessor of the Forty Committee.
I can't tell you exactly who was a member at that time.
Mr. Schwarz. Now, recognizing the difficulty you have
been having with respect to what is an assassination as
opposed to what is help to dissidents, are you capable
from the records here of testifying whether the Special
Group--testifying which branch of that Special Group
thought they were approving? Or is that something that
you cannot tell from these records?
Mr. Colby. This record merely says, limited amounts of
small arms, a limited supply of small arms and related
equipment. I do not know whether Mr. Rubottom, for
instance, attended the Special Group meeting. It was
the pattern at that time for the action officer of the
CIA, the Division Chief of the area, and frequently the
Assistant Secretary of that area, to attend that kind
of a Forty Committee meeting when a subject in their
area was being discussed.
-
-
-
:
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 13
-47-
TOP SECRET
Mr. Schwarz. Is it fair to sa from the written
record as presented in the 196 Report that one
cannot tell, up to this point, whether the Special
Group approved merely the send ng of arms to
dissidents in a sort of genera fashion, or ap-
proved the sending of arms to lissidents in a
target fashion for use in an assassination?
Mr. Colby. No, you cannot tel., except by the
knowledge of possibly the Assistant Secretary
of State. (Colby testimony, June 4, pp. 41-43)
March, 1961: The Purpose of the Weapons
Mr. Schwarz. It is perfectly
from the written record that a
1961 that any weapons that wer
lear, is it not,
least by March 17,
delivered were de-
signed for the purpose of assasination?
Mr. Colby. That any weapons which would be
delivered would probably be used by the dissident
group in an attack on Trujillo
Mr. Schwarz. And that means the assassination
of Trujillo does it not?
Mr. Colby. Yes.
Mr. Schwarz. It is clear, ist not, looking at
the cable of March 17, that that weapon is for the
purpose of an assassination, and the CIA headquarters
was so informed?
Mr. Colby. Yes.
The whole discussion of the various kinds of
weapons was aimed at providing the dissident group
with the weapons that they could use against Trujillo
and those around him. (Colbyestimony, June 4, p. 67)
March, 1961: Weapon: Provided
Mr. Schwarz. Following the in: tial turndown of
delivery by the pouch, did the Agency in fact ship
the revolvers sometime after March 25th and were
authorized by Mr. Bissell to do so?
Mr. Colby. I don't think we sł ipped the revolvers.
What we shipped, were carbines.
NW 47129 DocId: 32203760 Page 14

