157-10014-10218
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY:
RECORD NUMBER:
SSCIA
157-10014-10218
RECORD SERIES :
MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
07-M-123
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
04/24/1975
PAGES:
9
SUBJECTS:
CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
MEMORANDUM
Declassified
1B; IC
Redact
05/31/2000
CC Box 300
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 1
1
1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/08/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10218
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 07-M-123
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM :
TO :
TITLE :
DATE: 04/24/75
PAGES: 9
SUBJECTS: CIA
DOCUMENT TYPE:
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
MEMORANDUM
CLASSIFICATION : SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/20/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CC Box 300
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 2
(
(
>
Doston, David
O-R
(I-G)
interview
(1)
1.
300-8
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 3
COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE UNITED STATES
Washington, DC 20500
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR THE FILE
April 24, 1975
SUBJECT: Interview with M. David Boston
On Wednesday, April 23, 1975, M. David Boston was interviewed by
James N. Roethe at the South Building, Office of Technical Service
complex in Washington. The interview commenced at approximately
1:30 and terminated at approximately 3:10. Mr. Boston appeared
voluntarily for the interview.
Background Information on Mr. Boston
Boston has a Masters degree in Agricultural Biochemistry from the
University of Missouri. Several years prior to joining the Agency he
worked for UMC Industries, Inc. in St. Louis in their laboratory for
some period and doing pyrotechnics work for his last two years.
During those last years, he was working on several UMC Industries
projects for the CIA (an animal toxicology program and a secret
writing systems program). He was asked to join the Agency and did
so on May 1, 1961. He has worked with TSD or OTS (in the develop-
ment and engineering sections) during his entire CIA career.
For the first three months with CIA, Boston worked in the Chemistry
Branch. At the end of that period, a Biological Branch split off from
the Chemistry Branch and Boston remained there until 1968. There
were only three persons in that branch at the time (Boston, Dr. Ray
Treichler--its head, and Don Isenberg.) Isenberg was later replaced
by Dr. Don Sheldon in about 1965. In 1968 the Biological Branch
remerged with the Chemistry Branch. In July 1970, Boston became
Deputy Chief of the Chemistry Branch and in January 1971 he became
Branch Chief.
NW 50955 DocId:32423606 Page 4
SECRET
3
SECRET
Destruction of Documents re Drug Program
Shortly after Boston came aboard in 1961, Sid Gotlieb became Deputy
Chief of TSD. He had previously been Chief of the Development and
Engineering Section of TSD. He remained Deputy Chief of TSD for
about two years and then assumed the position of Chief which he
remained in until TSD was shifted from the Operations Directorate
to Science and Technology. At that time Gotlieb retired.
About six months before Gotlieb retired, he requested that Boston
destroy all records pertaining to a TSD project, MKULTRA. Gotlieb
did not tell Boston why these records were to be destroyed. Boston
was aware that these were contract files, funded under a special funding
mechanism which would not show CIA or governmental interest.
The
MKULTRA files consisted of 152 files dated from April 1952 through
May 1967. Boston called up all of these files from the CIA Archives,
had them torn and burned. It took four people a full day to destroy
these documents. Boston was never told whether Gotlieb made his
request at the request of Mr. Helms. However, he assumes that the
request came from higher authority because at the same time, ORD
was told to stop all work in its drug programs.
all involved drug programs although TSD was out of the drug business
at the time these files were destroyed.
The MKULTRA files
TSD's Drug Program
MKULTRA
Boston did do some fringe work on MKULTRA during his early years
with the Agency. He is sure that this project involved a search for
certain chemicals which could influence the behavior or mind of an
individual. The purpose of this work was to find drugs which would
open a person up and make him more vulnerable to interrogation,
or to temporarily disorient a person.
terminated because these chemicals were not being used operationally
and it was also difficult to find compounds of this nature.
The project was eventually
drugs that were experimented with were obtained from pharmaceutical
houses (drugs that had been rejected because of unusual side effects).
Many of the
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 5
SECRET
:
ORD had been keeping a list of such drugs. This was also the primary
source of drugs by Edgewood Arsenal which was the Army's installation
for experimentation in chemical warfare.
Testing on Animals
In the early 1960s, Boston himself conducted many tests of drugs on
animals. Much of this experimentation was undertaken by contractors
such as UMC Industries of St. Louis and Resources Research Institute
in San Mateo, California.
Testing with Humans
Boston only knows of three materials which were tested on humans while.
he was with OTS. These were all tested on voluntary subjects from the
Agency or from Bacaville Correctional Center in Bacaville, California.
The three are as follows:
1. A fluorescent chemical which when mixed with shampoo would
leave fluorescent traces on the hair. This was used for identification
purposes.
2. A non-detectable fluorescent tattoo also used for identification
purposes and detected with ultraviolet light.
3. Cylert-magnesium pemoline which is a memory and learning
enhancement material. Testing showed that this product was not
effective.
Boston himself tested the two fluorescent materials on himself.
None of these tests caused any bad side effects on the subjects.
Boston
has not heard of any tests every conducted by TSD or CTS which resulted
in bad side effects on humans. He has heard rumors that certain tests
were at one time conducted on unwitting subjects but he knows of none
of the specifics.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 6
SECRET
3
SECRET
LSD Program
Boston is aware of an LSD program run in the 1950s under Dr. Hank
Bortner. Dr. Bortner left the Agency many years ago and is since
deceased. He told Boston that he had taken LSD himself during the
course of testing. Boston was not aware that tests had ever been
conducted on unwitting subjects.
It is the Office of Technical Services' policy today not to conduct tests
of any type of product on unwitting subjects, no matter how harmless.
Boston believes that it has always been the policy of TSD and CTS to
test potentially harmful drugs (such as those which influence behavior)
only on witting subjects. He would have frowned upon tests of such
products on unwitting subjects.
The Biological Branch
The Biological Branch existed from 1961 through 1968. He engaged in
the following activities:
1. It conducted technical chemical warfare and biological warfare
surveillance programs to determine if foreigners were manufacturing
chemical warfare or biological warfare drugs. This consisted on taking
air and water samples and analyzing them.
2. The Branch developed tear gas and other harassment gasses
for use against foreign groups. These were used primarily by liaison
services to control crowds, etc., unfriendly to those governments.
The gasses were manufactured in canisters which were unmarked and
untraceable.
3. Animal training programs, started by ORD, were continued by
TSD. In particular, ravens were trained to deliver packages, etc.
4. The Branch also engaged in an ongoing analytical program
wherein they would analyze any substance brought to the Agency by
operating divisions.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 7
SECRET
4
SECRE
The Biological Branch has never engaged in any positive chemical war-
fare or biological warfare activity. They would have relied on Edgewood
Arsenal for chemical warfare materials or Fort Dietrich for biological
warfare materials. Both these installations were Army installations
and have been closed down.
The Chemical Branch
Since 1968 the Biological Branch remerged with the Chemical Branch,
Boston states that the Chemical Branch has engaged in the following
activities.
1. The development of power sources.
Branch's most important activity, taking up about two-thirds of its time.
This is by far the Chemical
These power sources are the types which are used by agents in trans-
mitters, etc., used in the field. These batteries must be of long-life
and of special configurations for concealment purposes.
2. The analytical facility previously operated by the Biological
Branch is now operated by the Chemical Branch.
3. Dog training activities are carried out to train dogs to retrieve
dead drops.
4. An Agency security pouch system has been developed which can-
not be opened without CIA being able to detect the fact that it has been
opened.
5. Several programs in the development of adhesives have been
undertaken to permit the quick planting of audio devices and to create
an adhesive for use in disguise.
6. The chemical warfare technical surveillance previously carried
on by the Biological Branch is now carried on by the Chemical Branch.
7. Some nuclear technical surveillance is conducted in conjunction
with the Systems Branch.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 8
6
8. The Branch has developed component parts for other development
and engineering branch projects.
9. The Branch is involved in a radiation health badge service for .
personnel overseas.
The Chemical Branch has not been engaged in any experimentation with
drugs which influence the mind or behavior. They have not been involved
at all with drugs that would in any way affect humans. If any branch
would carry on such activity, it would be the Chemical Branch.
(
The Manufacture of Poison Capsules
If poison capsules had been manufactured by CIA, the most likely place
for such manufacture would have been the Biological Branch of CTS or
TSD. Boston states that the Branch did have some capsules when he
first came aboard (he doesn't know who developed them; they have since
been destroyed). These were hydrogen-cyanide capsules for suicides.
They could not be given to a human unknowingly as the person taking
the capsule had to crush a gas capsule with his teeth and then suck back
sharply.
Boston is not aware of any other poison capsules which have been manu-
factured by the Chemical Branch or by the Biological Branch between
1961 and 1968. Boston reiterated that if a tasteless poison were to be
developed in capsule form, with a delayed lethal reaction, it would
almost surely be developed by the Biological Branch of TSD.
Boston stated that the Biological Branch was working with Fort Dietrich
on a dart launcher which would shoot a tiny dart which could not be felt
by the victim. The dart was large enough to carry lethal material but
it was being developed to simply immobilize victims and it apparently
was not large enough to carry sufficient amounts of knock-out material.
Boston believes he would have heard of a poison capsule project but he
is not sure. The requirement may have come to a specific individual
if it was a sensitive job.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 9
7
Dr. Ray Treichler, who was head of the Biological Branch from 1961
until 1966 or 1967, presently works for Hudson Manufacturing Company
in Chicago. Dr. Nathan Gordon, who took over for Dr. Treichler,
now is the Washington representative of the Midwest Research Institute
of Kansas City.
The Biological Branch would have been the branch most likely to prepare
any wearing apparel or diving gear infected with lethal strains of bio-
logical organisms. Boston is aware of no such requirements placed upon
OTS during the 1960s. He did state that CIA did support financially
some biological work being done by the Army at Fort Dietrich. He is
unaware of any requirements placed upon Fort Dietrich for organism
infected wearing apparel.
Miscellaneous Matters
Boston has engaged in no projects with CTS, nor has he heard of any
projects where he would have questioned the propriety of the project.
Those persons who may have been involved in early drug programs
include Dr. Treichler, Dr. Bortner (dead) and Dr. Gotlieb (in India).
Other old-timers in the Chemistry Branch include Dr. Lashbrook
(retired in 1960).
Boston is not aware of any testing done by CIA at Fort Dietrich.
It is unlikely that the Operations group would go outside the Agency
for a substance such as poison capsules.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 10
James N. Roethe...
BECRET
ADVICE AND WAIVER
Sovite Bldg.
Place Off The Serie Covey
Date
Time
4/23/75
199
Before you make any statement to, or answer any questions from,
the Commission or its investigators, you should understand that
you have the right to remain silent.
If you choose to answer,
anything you say can be used against you in court.
You may consult a lawyer for advice before any questions are put,
and you may have a lawyer with you during questioning.
cannot afford a lawyer, one will be appointed for you before
questioning if you wish.
If you
a lawyer present, you still have the right to stop answering at any
If you decide to answer questions without
time; or you may defer your answer until you talk to a lawyer.
WAIVER
I have read and understand the foregoing advice.
to make a statement and answer questions / with / / without_7
a lawyer at this time.
I am willing
me, and no pressure or coercion of any kind has been used against
No promises or threats have been made to
ne.
Witness:
Witness:
Witness:
NW 50955 DocId: 32423606 Page 11
Signed ton
f

