157-10003-10490
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
שיוויי
γιιπης
Date: 04/19/94
Page:1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10003-10490
RECORDS SERIES :
MEMORANDUM
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF CIA INFORMATION
IN THIS DOCUMENT AS SANITIZED
6/12/98
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR: ROCK
FROM: CARGILL, MASON
TO: FILE
TITLE :
PROJECT ZRRIFLE AND QJWIN
DATE: 05/30/75
PAGES: 12
SUBJECTS:
PROJECT ZRRIFLE AND QJWIN
ASSASSINATIONS
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : U
RESTRICTIONS
1A, 1B, DONOR REST., REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: X
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 04/20/94
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
NW 50955 DocId: 32201879 Page 1
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
MEMORANDUM
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
COMMISSION ON CIA ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE UNITED STATES
Washington, DC 20500
April 30, 1975
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
AS SANITIZED
14-4-94
le
(1) (A)
(1) (B)
To:
File
From:
Mason Cargill M
Subject: PROJECT ZRRIFLE AND QJWIN
On April 25, 1975, I was given three file folders
containing material on the above subjects by Mr. Joseph Selzer
of the Inspector General's staff. According to Mr. Selzer, his
review of these files indicates that the basic purpose of
ZRRIFLE and its asset QJWIN was the burglarization of premises
outside the United States for the purpose of obtaining crypto-
logic materials. He assures me that there is nothing in these
files which refer explicitly or implicitly to assassination or
"executive action" in any form. His opinion is that clandes-
tine operatives of the type who wrote the documents contained
in these files would never commit to writing anything having
to do with the subject of assassination.
The first file reviewed is entitled "ZRRIFLE/QJWIN/
RYBAT OPERATIONAL." The following entries in this file seem
to have some potential relevance:
17-10
1. Dispatch, dated November 1, 1960, to Chief of Station,
Dakar and Chief of Station, Luxembourg, from Chief, KUTUBE/D
at headquarters. This three-page dispatch apparently deals
with a mission on which a recruited agent, Jose Marie Andre
Mankel, will be sent from Luxembourg, where he was recruited,
to Dakar for the purpose of recruiting certain other agents
from among criminal elements there, specifically Corsicans.
The purpose for which these agents would ultimately be used
is not clear from this dispatch. However, paragraph 2a reads
as follows: "In view of the extreme sensitivity of the
NW 50555 DocId: 32201879 Page 2
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
PROPERTY OF
01955
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
2
objective for which we want him to perform his task, he was
not told precisely what we want him to do. Instead, he was
told that we have evidence of Soviet operations among
nationality groups in Africa, specifically, Corsicans, and
that we would like to have him spot, assess, and recommend
some dependable, quick-witted persons for our use. (Comment:
It was thought best to withhold our true, specific require-
ments pending the final decision to use MANKEL.) He agreed
to go on the trip for us." It is not clear from this dispatch
that Chiefsof Station in Luxembourg and makar were completely
witting of the purpose for which Mankel is being sent to Dakar.
Paragraph 3 contains the following sentence: "Rabney gave
Jouvenoy [Chief of Station, Luxembourg) the same briefing.
concerning our purposes as he had given to the COS, Dakar,"
The remainder of the dispatch deals with details of the con-
tacts with Americans which Mankel may make in Dakar if he
requires further assistance, including instruction for bringing
about a clandestine meeting.
15-20
Dakar 12-10
2. Cable dated November 2, 1960, from rankfurt to the
Director with the notation: "Action: C/FI/D-4." This cable
contains the following statement in paragraph 1: "Altman met
Mankel 2 November. He accepted offer to procede Leopoldville.
Precise mission not conveyed to him, he only informed that
mission might involve large element of personal risk."
3. Cable, dated November 3, 1960, from Director to
stations at Luxembourg and bakany-This cable contains the
first identification of Mankel with the code name QJWIN.
The cable reads as follows: "AUDW 147 on QJWIN trip Dakar
pouched both stations 3 November. 22 Confirm receipt by cable.
12-10
13
"Luxembourg: will advise when to brief him on Dakar
mission after receipt further info from Altman per paragraph
to GRAND 6959/(IN36814) on Leopoldville mission." This cable
contains the following code word references: RYBAT, LAURICLE,
ZRACORN.
4.
Cable from Leopoldville to Director, with action
to C/FI/D4, dated 5 November 1960. It contains the following
paragraph:
01956
PROPERT
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFive
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
3
"Please inform Mankel he should proceed Leopoldville
as soon as shots completed. Not necessary have Congo visa.
Should go Paris and take Air France flight to Brazzaville
and can obtain visa for Brazzaville in Paris."
This cable contains a handwritten note in the margin as
follows: "One copy given to Mr. Bissell by IS/Duty Off.
Saturday. Action to be taken by DDP. Ε.Β."
5. Cable, dated November 9, 1960, to Luxembourg from
Director. It contains the following statement: "Unless you
advised to contrary by Altman, brief QJWIN on Dakar mission,
using notes left during Rabney visit... Please insure he
thoroughly rehearsed all details since we anticipate he will
go from Leopoldville to Dakar with no opportunity reviewing
briefing...
6. Cable, November 11, 1960, to Director, from
Luxembourg. Paragraph 2 contains the following statement:
"QJWIN recommended two French contacts who agree undertake
unspecified job. Arrangement made for direct access without
QJWIN if Altman interested..."
7.
Cable, dated November 12, 1960, to Director, from
Leopoldville. This cable requests the immediate departure
of QJWIN for Leopoldville, and contains the following state-
ment: "Local operational circumstances require immediate
expediting of QJWIN travel to Leopoldville."
8. The file contains several documents apparently
describing various Italians in the area of Trieste who have
the capability to break and enter and crack safes. They
appeared to be of questionable morality. Reports on the safe-
crackers were transmitted in a dispatch from the Chief of
Station in Nomonto the Chief, KUDOVE/D. The names of the
safecrackers in question are Sabatti, Cuccagna, and Bernardini.
9. Cable, dated December 8, 1960, from Leopoldville to
the Director. It indicates that one purpose of QJWIN's
presence in Leopoldville is to recruit a major in the
Yugoslavian air force, through framing him up in an illegal
smuggling transaction. This recruitment is apparently for
the purpose of collecting information from within the
Yugoslavian government.
50955 DocId: 32201879 Page 4
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
PROPERTY OF
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE.
01957
4
10. Cable, dated December 14, 1960, from headquarters
to Leopoldville. The cable criticizes Leopoldville for using
QJWIN for the purpose of recruiting the Yugoslav major, since
this was not his primary purpose in Leopoldville. Cable con-
tains the following statement: "Would like restrict QJWIN to
activity directly pertinent his mission Leopoldville or forth-
coming mission Dakar and possibly elsewhere (e.g., Milan) for
KUTUBE/D purposes. He our only asset of this type and we
wish keep him clean of any operational involvement other than
that originally planned for him." This is the first cable
from headquarters on which the name of William K. Harvey appears.
11. Cable, dated December 17, 1960, from Leopoldville
to Director. This cable concerned a new asset entering the
picture for the first time, who arrived in Leopoldville on
December 2. The cable states that WIROGUE was the asset with
whom initial contact has been made in Leopoldville. WIROGUE
is living in the same hotel as QJWIN with whom he conversed.
QJWIN has reported: "WIROGUE had offered him $300 per month
to participate in intel net and be member execution squad.
When QJWIN said he not interested, WIROGUE added there would
be bonuses for special jobs. Under QJWIN questioning, WIROGUE
later said he working for PBPRIME service."
12. Cable, dated January 19, 1961, from Director to
Luxembourg. This cable apparently indicates that the Agency.
plans to use QJWIN in Leopoldville for more than one particular
mission. It contained the following statement: "Inform
QJWIN we planning use him Leopoldville indefinitely as dis-
cussed with him there."
13. There follows a series of cables reflecting the
fact that QJWIN proceeds to Italy to recruit other assets.
One cable admonishes field agents to tell QJWIN not to give
reason to any of the candidates to be recruited in Italy to
believe that ODYOKE or PBPRIME is involved. I get the
impression that ODYOKE refers to the U.S. CIA, and PBPRIME
refers to the intelligence service of some other nation.
However, no document uncovered so far confirms this. Cables
which follow seem to indicate that the people QJWIN was to
recruit were intended to be professional burglars. There is
no indication that they are intended to be assassins. There
are many other indications that these recruits were intended
for safecracking and breaking and entering. QJWIN told them
he could offer a job for a large firm which wanted certain
commercial documents stolen.
NW 50955 DocId: 32201879 Page 5
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
5
14. Subsequent cables and dispatches indicate other
efforts on the part of QJWIN to recruit safecrackers in
France and Italy.
15. Dispatch dated June 7, 1961, from headquarters,
It
Chief, KUTUBE/D to the Chief of Station in Luxembourg.
contains a long discussion of the Agency's relationship with
QJWIN and his main purpose as an agent. This dispatch makes
it clear that the primary purpose of QJWIN's employment by
the Agency is to recruit burglars and safecrackers for use
by the CIA. This dispatch contains the first reference I
have found to the code word ZRRIFLE. The one thing that seems
rather unclear is why QJWIN was initially sent to Leopoldville,
and apparently was contemplated to return to Leopoldville, when
all of his recruiting of safecrackers and burglars takes place
in Europe. The fact that his return to Leopoldville was con-
templated may be easily seen from paragraph one of this cable.
The releasing officer on this cable was Mr. William K. Harvey.
16. Correspondence and cables indicate that one James
Rabney from CIA headquarters visited Europe in April and
March of 1961 for the purpose of meeting with Mankel to discuss
possible recruits for safecracking operations.
17. Dispatch dated December 15, 1961, from Chief of
Station in Luxembourg to Headquarters, Chief, KUTUBE/D. It
discusses the efforts of QJWIN to recruit two safecrackers in
Switzerland. It indicates that two French citizens, named
Santelli and Garioni were asked to come to Switzerland under
false pretenses by QJWIN for the purpose of being interviewed,
The following passage in the dispatch indicates clearly these
men were to be recruited for the purpose of the safecracking
and surreptitious entry. "During the interview with Santelli,
Garioni observed that for a night job he would need an
assistant to help him with carrying the equipment and to act
as lookout. He said he would prefer to do the job during
working hours; for this he would get three or four others to
help him and force someone in the office to open the safe."
18.
Dispatch dated February 2, 1962, from Chief of
Station Luxembourg to Headquarters, Chief, KUTUBE/D. It
discusses the efforts of the Luxembourg station to provide
acceptable cover for Mankel in Germany, where the Agency has
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
PROPERTY OF
THE WHITE HOUSE OFFICE
6
decided to locate him. The plan seems to be for Mankel to
develop a business as an art dealer in some German town selling.
French paintings. It is contemplated that the Agency will
supply the initial capital for the formation of his business.
The final sentence in this dispatch asked headquarters for
projected operational plans for QJWIN.
19. Cable, dated March 17, 1962, from Director to
Luxembourg indicates that the Agency still contemplates some
activity for Mankel in Leopoldville. Paragraph 2 of this cable
reads as follows: "Tell him will at same time discuss
Leopoldville assignment and have him sign contract." The
cable directs Luxembourg to tell Mankel to meet James Rabney
at certain locations in Germany on the 28th and 29th of March,
1961, telling him to be prepared to travel in Europe for about
two weeks.
ol
20. Cable dated April 18, 1962, from Headquarters to
Luxembourg states that another agent (ONNERDS had informed
the Agency that QJWIN is going on trial after Easter on charges
of cobalt smuggling from 1957 or 1958 and could receive up to a
six-year sentence. Paragraph 2 of the cable states, "Please
contact QJWIN for all details including specific charges and
name prosecutor. If, BANNER 5info true we may wish attempt
quash charges or arrange somehow salvage QJWIN for our purposes.
Paragraph 3 states, "Still do not have basic decisions but
fully anticipate we will need QJWIN."
21. Cable, dated April 26, 1962, from Luxembourg to
Headquarters indicates that QJWIN's trial will be completed on
April 29. He expects to be fined but not subject to a jail
sentence. Some indication of the Agency's intents with
respect to QJWIN may be discerned from paragraph 4 which
reads as follows: "While we do not know present long-term
plans for QJWIN, he has no lead to other candidates.
His
potential appears restricted activation to candidates OLLA
1426 or personal spot action. Suggest either could be done
from Leopold base and question if not preferable move him to
Leopold assignment now." There is a handwritten notation
beside the first sentence of paragraph 4 which states, "Not
the point." Beside the last sentence of this paragraph is
the handwritten notation, "How?"
N55 DocId: 32201879 Page 7
:
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
7
22. Cable dated May 24, 1962, to Luxembourg from
Headquarters indicates that the Agency has changed its plans
about assigning QJWIN any duties in Leopoldville. Paragraph 2
reads, "Decision made keep QJWIN Europe. Leopoldville assign-
ment canceled." Cable also indicates that headquarters
approves of Mankel's proposed move to Germany, probably
Baden-Baden.
23. Memorandum dated July 3, 1962, WKH (presumably
William K. Harvey) from AMS, re ZRRIFLE. This memo discusses
possible future uses for QJWIN. It seems perfectly consistent
with the use of QJWIN merely for the purpose of recruiting
safecrackers and burglars. Paragraph 4 of this memo refers to
some ZRRIFLE authorization paper: "I have already given you
the ZRRIFLE authorization paper signed by Helms and Skip has
been given QJWIN contract, including the extension to 1
March 1963." An attachment to this memorandum gives details
on two possible candidates for burglary and safecracking.
this attachment there are two references, however, which may
be somewhat disturbing: One candidate is stated to be "willing
to use gun"; the second "wanted to know if he should be armed
for job--ready to go to the end."
24. Immediately following a dispatch dated
December 7, 1962, from Luxembourg to headquarters, there
appears in the files two pages of penciled notes on yellow
"buck-slip" type paper which are difficult to read but may
be relevant. At the top of the first page appears the word
QJWIN. On this page appears the following words, which are
barely legible: "In 1961 by Bill H or Bissell used Arnold
Estale [or Estate) direct action capability established in
B [illegible) QJWIN Luxembourg principal prelim capability
for fourth country. QJWIN spotted three or four--moved to
Italy..."
In
25. Dispatch from Luxembourg to Headquarters Chief,
KUTUBE, dated February 14, 1964, indicates that QJWIN has
been terminated. Paragraph 1 reads in part, "QJWIN has been
terminated. "Rozeney told him on 21 April that the operation
in which he was to play a role had been shelved and therefore
his contract, which ran out on 29 February, was not renewed.
He was reassured that this action did not result from anything
he had done and his past cooperation was appreciated'. It was
mentioned as conceivable that the operation might have been
off and running if he had been able to establish his cover
last year."
:
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
8
Another file examined was entitled "ZRRIFLE
Administrative/Financial"; it is a long manila-type file.
The following items of possible interest were noted in this
file:
1. Memorandum dated January 11, 1961, to the Finance
Division from William K. Harvey, Chief FI/D deals with the
payments for Mankel's trip to Leopoldville. Paragraph 2 of
this memo states, "In order to avoid any misunderstanding,
it should be noted that QJWIN was sent on this trip for a
specific, highly sensitive operational purpose which has been
completed. Although future use of QJWIN is not precluded, it
was not deemed fitting during this one use of him to enter
into a continuing contractual relationship or to have him sign
any memorandum of understanding."
2. Memorandum, dated January 31, 1961, for Chief,
Accounts Branch, Finance Division, from Justin E. O'Donnell,
Subject: Payments to QJWIN. Paragraph 1 of this memorandum reads
as follows: "QJWIN was recruited in Frankfurt 1 November 1960
to undertake a one-shot mission to the Belgian Congo. Because
the mission potentially involved great personal risk to him
and he was obliged to separate himself from his business affairs,
it was agreed orally by this writer with QJWIN that his com-
pensation would be at the rate of $1,000 per month, plus his
expenses, for a period of not less than one month and not more
than two months." These two financial memoranda, numbers 1 and
2 here, seem to indicate a one-shot purpose for QJWIN in con-
nection with a Congo operation, which seems inconsistent with
many of the papers in the operational file reviewed above,
which indicated an ongoing relationship with QJWIN for the
purposes of recruiting safecrackers and burglars. These
financial memoranda are certainly quite consistent with a plan
to use QJWIN for a one-shot assassination attempt in the
Belgian Congo. It is unclear that merely recruiting safe-
crackers and burglars or even performing safecracking and
burglary missions, would have involved "potential great
personal risk" to QJWIN.
3. Memorandum, dated March 24, 1961, for Cable
Secretariat from William K. Harvey, Chief, FI/Division D,
Subject: "Distribution of ZRRIFLE Traffic." Paragraph 1
of this memorandum reads, "Two copies of all cables bearing
the ZRRIFLE indicator are to be delivered in a sealed envelope
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
9
directly to Chief, FI/Division D, 1502 L Building. No other
distribution is to be made without the specific approval in
each instance of the Chief, FI/D." Paragraph 2 reads, "The
above has been personally approved by the Deputy Director
(Plans)." I question whether such close handling of cable
traffic is not unusual even in a case involving safecracking
and burglary. Perhaps Harvey intended traffic of more
sensitive issues to be passed through the ZRRIFLE channel.
4.
Within
In a large manila envelope filed immediately
after a dispatch to Luxembourg from the Chief, KUTUBE, dated
September 30, 1963, is a large manila envelope marked
"Documents in Receipt Supporting ZRRIFLE Activities.
this envelope are several smaller manila envelopes, one of
which is entitled "ZRRIFLE, Receipts for Accounting Submitted
by WK Harvey, Receipt for Operational Phone Calls May 15, 1963."
Within this envelope are two sheets of yellow legal size paper
which contain lists of operational expenses submitted by W.K.
Harvey covering the period April 13-21, 1963, all of which are
to be charged as operational expenses to QJWIN/ZRRIFLE.
These
expenses cover hotel expenses in Miami and Perine, Florida,
long distance hotel calls for these locations, plus $75 for a
boat chartered for operational purposes at Islamorada, Florida.
A hotel receipt indicates Harvey paid the bill of a Mr. John A.
Wallston of 56510 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, California,
for the nights of April 17, 18, and 19, and a Miami hotel,
probably the Eden Roc. These documents are the first indication
of any activities within the U.S. with respect to ZRRIFLE.
Apparently they did not involve QJWIN but rather other
activity, perhaps directed at Cuba because of his location in
Miami. Perhaps Harvey should be confronted with this listing
and asked to explain it.
A third file was examined, which was marked "ZRRIFLE-
QJWIN Project/Contract.
found:
The following items of interest were
1. A long memorandumwritten in ink in longhand on sheets
of yellow, legal size paper at the very back of this file
entitled "Project ZRRIFLE." This is apparently justification
material submitted for the project. The first portion of this
memorandum seems to end abruptly at the end of the second page;
NW 50955 DocId:32201879 Page 10
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE
10
perhaps the subsequent pages are missing. These first two
pages portray the objective of ZRRIFLE to be that of pro-
curement of code and cipher materials by burglary and safe-
cracking. However, subsequent pages, particularly the last
four legal size pages in this file, contain what appears to
be the outline of something which could be the establishment
of an "executive action capability," although these words are
not mentioned nor is the word "assassination." A copy of these
pages should definitely be obtained. Paragraph 1 of these
pages reads as follows, "Legal, ethical, moral, operational
problems; political nonattributability." Paragraph 2 reads
in part: "Our own experience (Bangkok) (and affect on DDP)
and experiences with KGB...require most professional, proven
operationally competent ruthless stable CE experience ops
officers..."
Paragraph 3 of this memo is entitled "Maximum Security";
subparagraph 3b reads: "Within KUBARK one focal point for
control, search, tracing, case officering, etc. DDP authority
in this focal point mandatory. DCI officially advised?"
Paragraph 3c reads as follows: "Max. security cable COMMO
for innocuous cables only; no restrictions on travel; pos-
sibility of one man overseas (Europe) control base with own
(nonstation) COMMO. Word of mouth and no bashfulness re
trips." Paragraph 3f reads as follows, "No use of any agent
who ever worked for a U.S. government agency. Tracing by
opposition would reveal." Paragraph 3i reads, "Pretext:
KUTUBE/D search; this established (e.g., Rome)." Paragraph 3j
reads, "No discussion in stations." Paragraph 3k reads, "No
'team' until ready to go, if at all." Paragraph 4 reads:
"Blackmail: A. No American citizens or residents or people
whoever obtained U.S. visas. B. No chain of connections:
Strictly person to person; singleton ops. C. No meeting any
candidate in home territory. D. Exclude organizations; e.g.,
Sicilians, criminals, those with record of arrest, those with
instability of purpose as criminals. E. Staffers involved--
selection." Paragraph 5 reads, "Cover: Planning should
include provision for blaming Soviets or Czechs in case of
blow." (This seems to indicate ZRRIFLE is not limited to
burglary of embassies; how could you blame the Soviets or
the Czechs for burglarizing their own embassies?) Paragraph
9 reads, "Should have phoney 201 in records to backstop this
[referring to blaming the Soviets or the Czechs), all documents
therein forged and backdated. "Should look like a CE file."
Paragraph 1l reads, "Silverthorne."
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
11
On the following page of these papers, the paragraphs
are numbered again from one. On this page a large ink X has
been placed over the page; however, it is still legible.
Paragraph 1 of this page reads, "Maximum security plus within
KUBARK only (e.g., How much does Sivagusa [?] now know?).
Limitation on number code clerks for enciphering and deciphering.
Guise of LAURICLE objective." Paragraph 5 reads, "No chain
of connections permitting blackmail."
2. Memorandum, dated February 19, 1962, from Richard
Helms, Deputy Director (Plans), to William K. Harvey, Subject:
"Authorization of ZRRIFLE Agent Activities." This memorandum
authorizes Harvey to retain the services of agent QJWIN "and
such other principal agents and subagents as may be required."
Memorandum does not state the purpose of the ZRRIFLE project.
3. Filed immediately after a memorandum dated March 6,
1969, from Richard Helms to William K. Harvey, is a normal
business size white envelope containing the following notation
on the front in penciled handwriting, "Lloyd very personal
from Bill H." Within this envelope is a small yellow piece
of paper containing the following notation in penciled hand-
writing, "John Rosselli, alias John Ralston--Wm. Walker."
4.
A memorandum dated June 27, 1963, for Chief,
Foreign Intelligence, from William K. Harvey, Subject: QJWIN.
This memo states that QJWIN is currently not being used for
any operational purposes. It discusses whether or not he
should be retained as an agent. Paragraph 2 seems to indicate
that the executive action portion of QJWIN's project, if any,
has been terminated. This paragraph reads: "As far as the
ZRRIFLE aspects of this operation which has been covered under
the QJWIN authorization for security reasons and with which
Fletcher M. Knight is fully familiar as I orally advised you
on June 26, 1963, except for one precautionary 'lifeline,'
aspects of this case have been terminated and need no longer,
except perhaps for minor accountings, be considered as a part
of this project."
A last file of the ZRRIFLE series examined is entitled
"ZRRIFLE Name Traces/Personality Sketches." Items of interest
in this file are as follows:
TOP SECRET
SENSITIVE
12
1. Piece of thin white paper under tab C, the heading
of which is "Secret-RYBAT." This document is a list of traits
which desired recruits would have. This is similar to the
list of traits deemed desirable in the handwritten memorandum
contained in the far rear of the previous file reviewed. This
set of characteristics, however, could refer to burglars and
safecrackers as well as assassins. This is indicated by
paragraph 8 which reads, "Commercial firms (unspecified)--
industrial documents cover."
2.
Included under tab M is a dossier of one Harold
Meltzer, a resident of Los Angeles, with a long criminal
record. This is the first instance in which I have noted
a U.S. citizen under consideration for any recruitment with
respect to the ZRRIFLE project.
3. Under tab T, information on Orlando Portale, an
Italian citizen residing in Detroit, is included.
4.
At tab Y is a page of information on one Hanna
Yazbeck. The report states, "He often heads up a hatchet
squad when disputes arise between the Moslem and Christian
underworld factions in Beirut." The second paragraph of this
page reads as follows: "During the period I was in Europe
(1950-1958), his chief bodyguard was a convicted murderer who
owed his release from prison to Yazbeck's power. This body-
guard has since been murdered, but Yazbeck has an available
pool of assassins."
NW 50955 DocId:32201879 Page 13
TOP SECRET SENSITIVE