157-10014-10161
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY:
SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10014-10161
MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
RECORD SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
07-M-66
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
MADIGAN, MICHAEL J.
TO:
CHURCH, FRANK
TITLE:
MEETING 29 JULY 1975
DATE:
06/10/1975
PAGES:
18
SUBJECTS:
MAHEU, ROBERT A:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
MEMORANDUM
Declassified
1B; IC
Redact
03/22/2000
CCBOX 447
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 1
1
AGENCY: SSCIA
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/07/95
Page: 1
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10014-10161
RECORDS SERIES: MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-66
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
FROM: MADIGAN, MICHAEL J.
TO: CHURCH, FRANK
TITLE: MEETING 29 JULY 1975
DATE: 06/10/75
PAGES: 18
SUBJECTS: MAHEU, ROBERT A.
DOCUMENT TYPE: MEMORANDUM
CLASSIFICATION : TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/08/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CCBOX 447
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 2
MEETING 29 JULY 75 BOX 447
447-6
TOP SECRET
TOP SECRET
MEMORANDUM
MAR 21 1977
To:
Senators Frank Church, John Tower, Philip A. Hart,.
Walter F. Mondale, Walter D. Huddleston,
Robert Morgan, Gary Hart, Howard H. Baker, Jr.,
Barry Goldwater, Charles McC. Mathias, Jr.,
From:
Michael J. Madigan, Counsel
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence
Date:
June 10, 1975
Subj:
Robert A. Maheu Appearance Before the Committee
Fifth Amendment Invocation
Congressional Immunity
Robert A. Maheu was subpoenaed to and did appear before
this Committee on June 9, 1975. In response to all sub-
stantive questions put to him, Maheu invoked his Constitu-
tional rights under the Fifth Amendment. Maheu, through
his counsel, indicated that his sole basis for refusing to
answer the Committee's questions was his invocation of the
Fifth Amendment.
His counsel indicated that should the Com-
mittee vote to immunize Maheu, Maheu would cooperate fully
with the Committee and answer any and all questions.
NW 50955 DocId:32423549 Page 4
TOP SECRE
-2-
A Congressional committee has the power to compel.
testimony from any person who is subpoenaed to appear
before it. This power to compel testimony, however, is
limited by the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrim-
ination. Succinctly, the Fifth Amendment privilege protects
a witness against disclosures which could be used against
him in a criminal prosecution, or could lead to evidence
which could be used against him in any such prosecution. It
can be argued that the events about which Maheu was and
will be questioned took place well more than five years ago
and that, therefore, the statute of limitations for any
crime that he may have committed would have run. The argu-
ment would continue that since the statute of limitations
has run on any possible criminal conduct, Maheu therefore
has no Fifth Amendment right to assert before this Committee
about any question asked of him concerning an event upon
which the statute of limitations has run.
Maheu's counsel,
however, has asserted that notwithstanding that the events
questioned about occurred more than five years ago, he has
advised his client not to answer any questions because of a
fear of a possible prosecution for conspiracy to cover up
those events. While Maheu's arguments for asserting the
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 5
-3-
Fifth Amendment may not be totally persuasive, they are
sufficient enough to create a question which a court would
ultimately have to decide. In short, therefore, Maheu's
assertion of the Fifth Amendment at least has a semblance
of validity.
In the final analysis, the Committee is faced with
three options with regard to Maheu's assertion of the Fifth
Amendment:
(1) challenge Maheu's assertion of the Fifth Amendment
as not well founded under the law and ultimately go to court
to decide whether Maheu's assertion is or is not valid;
(2) grant Maheu "use immunity" (explanation infra)
and compel his testimony to all questions the Committee
wishes to ask which are within the framework of the Commit-
tee's mandate;
(3) not obtain any testimony from Maheu.
Of these three options, it appears that the quickest
and best option is to grant Maheu "use immunity" and compel
his testimony.
NW 50955 DocId:32423549 Page 6
-4-
The Nature of Use Immunity
In 1970, Congress amended the immunity laws and created
"use immunity" to compel testimony of a witness before a
Congressional committee. The immunity statute is found
in 18 United States Code, Sec. 6001 et seq. The statute
provides in pertinent part:
"Whenever a witness refuses, on the
basis of his privilege against self-
incrimination, to testify
in a
proceeding before
a committee or a
subcommittee of either House and the per-
son presiding over the proceeding communi-
cates to the witness an order issued under
this part, the witness may not refuse to
comply with the order on the basis of his
privilege against self-incrimination; but
no testimony or other information compelled
under the order (or any information directly
or indirectly derived from such testimony or
other information) may be used against the
witness in any criminal case, except a prose-
cution for perjury, giving a false statement,
or otherwise failing to comply with the order."
This statute allows a Congressional committee to grant "use
immunity" to any witness appearing before it who invokes his
Constitutional rights under the Fifth Amendment. "Use immun-
ity" means simply that a witness' compelled testimony be-
fore a Congressional committee cannot be used against him
in a subsequent criminal prosecution by either state or
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 7
-5-
federal authorities.
Additionally, no information derived
directly or indirectly from the witness's compelled testi-
mony before a Congressional committee may be used against
him in any subsequent criminal prosecution by either state
or federal/ This does not mean, however, that the witness
is "immune" from prosecution for any criminal conduct about
which he testifies.
The federal or state prosecuting auth-
orities may prosecute the witness if they have independent
information (other than the witness' own testimony) which
would constitute a basis for indictment of the witness.
Thus, in essence, "use immunity" merely provides that the
witness' own testimony which is compelled before a Congres-
sional committee may not be later used as the basis for his
own indictment for criminal conduct about which he has testi-
fied before the Committee.
The immunity statute provides that the Committee by a
vote of two-thirds of its members must agree to give the
witness immunity and that notice of the Committee's action
in granting the witness immunity must be filed with the
Attorney General. The immunity statute provides that notice
must be given to the Attorney General so that he has ten
days in which to search his files and segregate any incrim-
inating information he may have against the witness so that
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 8
-6-
the witness may not later contend that the Attorney General's
evidence came from any testimony the witness might give be-
fore the Congressional committee. The statute also pro-
vides that the Attorney General may request twenty more
days, in addition to the ten days which the statute pro-
vides, in which to segregate his files. The Attorney Gen-
eral, however, may waive any or all of the thirty day wait-
ing period. Communication has already been made through
Fritz Schwarz to Mr. O'Connor at the Department of Justice.
Maheu's Value to the Committee as a Witness
Robert A. Maheu has been utilized by the CIA for a wide
variety of projects and tasks. The two most important areas
in which his testimony may be expected are (1) Assassinations
and the Las Vegas wiretap; and (2) domestic CIA activities.
This memorandum will briefly outline the areas of informa-
tion about which Maheu can be questioned and in which Maheu
has knowledge.
(1) Assassinations
Maheu was the person originally contacted by the
CIA in August of 1960 to provide them with an introduction
to organized crime figures in order to accomplish the assassi-
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 9
-7-.
nation of Fidel Castro. Maheu met CIA officer O'Connell
and introduced O'Connell to one John Roselli who was, at
that time, an organized crime figure in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Maheu also was apparently involved in the introduction of
the CIA officials to Sam Giancana and Santos Trafficante.
Roselli was alleged to have had the ice machine concessions
in the gambling interests in Las Vegas; Giancana was one of
the Mafia bosses; and Trafficante was the Mafia leader of
the Cuban gambling interests. It was thought that the
Mafia would be interested in assisting the CIA in this pro-
ject because of its (the Mafia's) concern for getting rid of
Castro who was about to close down their gambling operations
in Havana. After the introductions by Maheu, it is unclear
as to exactly what Maheu's role was during the various
assassination attempts. Maheu is said to have spent much
time in Florida during this period of time, however. Maheu
was involved in the $150,000 offer which was made by the
CIA to the Mafia for the accomplishment of the assassination
of Castro. Maheu may or may not know many of the details
regarding the shipping of the poison pills to various
individuals in Florida in an attempt to have Castro assassinated.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 10
-8-
Later, Maheu participated in the introduction of the
second CIA officer (Harvey) to Roselli in New York for
purposes of Harvey taking over the Agency's liaison role
with the members of the Mafia in the ongoing attempts to
assassinate Castro. The time period of the Maheu/Harvey/
Roselli efforts begin in April, 1962 and last at least until
sometime into 1963. During this period of time there has
been alleged to have been $50,000 in small bills in a suit-
case shipped down to Florida for delivery upon the comple-
tion of the assassination.
This, of course, never took
place and the money was alleged to have been shipped back
up to the CIA in Washington. Additionally, $10,000 on one
occasion and perhaps $1,000 or $2,000 on another occasion
is alleged to have been given to individuals in Florida
along with quantities of guns and explosives in pursuance
of the Agency's goal of assassinating Castro.
While it is uncertain as to Maheu's exact knowledge
of the details of either the so-called "first phase" or
"second phase" of the assassination attempts, he did provide
the original introductions and may have extensive knowledge of
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 11
-9-
the events occurring thereafter.
In any event, his testi-
mony will provide the sworn details of how the original
Agency contact took place, who was there, and what was said
and what eventually was done.
(2) Las Vegas Wiretap on Dan Rowan's Apartment
Maheu will be able to provide the Committee detailed
testimony on how this tap was requested, why it was requested,
and how the CIA was involved.
It has been alleged and testi-
fied to (by witness O'Connell) that the Las Vegas tap on
Rowan's apartment originated with a request by Maheu to
the CIA that Giancana wanted a tap placed in the apartment.
Maheu advised the Agency to seek its approval of the placing
of the tap. In my opinion, Maheu did this so that if any-
one was caught he could then avoid prosecution since the
Agency was involved (which ultimately occurred).
The CIA, in its documents, has denied it had any
advance knowledge of the tap but this denial is contradicted
by the sworn testimony of CIA agent O'Connell who says that
Maheu did advise him in advance that Giancana wanted the
tap placed.
O'Connell further testified that Maheu said
that if the tap was not placed, Giancana would withdraw from
his efforts in the assassination scheme. O'Connell testified
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 12
-10-
that this was passed upward within the CIA and that
approval to place the tap came back down to O'Connell and
O'Connell transmitted it to Maheu. The tap was placed on
the telephone in Rowan's apartment and subsequently the
persons who placed it were apprehended.
The tap was placed
O'Connell has also
in (approximately) the winter of 1960.
testified that the CIA provided the money to pay the indi-
viduals who Maheu hired to place the tap.
Subsequently, the Justice Department was investigating
the Las Vegas tap and there was a move within the Department
to prosecute Maheu and the persons who placed the tap for
illegal wiretapping. It was at this time that Maheu went
to the CIA and asked the CIA to intervene with the Justice
The CIA then
Department to get his prosecution dropped.
approached Attorney General Kennedy and the prosecution was
dropped. Maheu can provide the Committee detailed testi-
mony in this area and is one of the few people who can do
so. Maheu's testimony regarding the details of these con-
versations in this area is of great importance to the
Committee.
He can establish the involvement
or lack of involvement of the CIA in this illegal wiretap.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 13
-11-
(3) Maheu involvement in CIA domestic activities
In 1954 Maheu was recruited by the CIA for use
by the CIA's Office of Security for "extremely sensitive
cases." He was paid $500 per month on the condition that
he move into his own private office (he had previously
shared office space with Carmine Bellino
associated in
the past with illegal wiretapping) and be "on call" by the
Office of Security for sensitive assignments.
The CIA doc-
uments do not indicate how long a period Maheu was on the
$500 per month retainer, but it would appear that this re-
tainer was only for the first year or two, i.e. 1954-55.
It was at this time that Maheu was first starting out in
the investigative area and in fact it was in the year 1954
that Maheu first formed his private investigations company
of Robert A.. Maheu Associates. Through the previous testi-
mony of CIA official O'Connell we know that Maheu was used
for wiretapping and surreptitious entries.
O'Connell re-
calls one specific incident of Maheu entering a student's
apartment in Washington, D. C. for the CIA. Maheu can pro-
vide detailed testimony on exactly what he did for the CIA,
how often and where.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 14
-12-
(a) Wiretapping/Surveillance of Aristotle Onassis
In July of 1954 Maheu was hired by British
shipping interests sponsored by Stavros Niarchos. During his
employment for Niarchos Maheu conducted a surveillance of
Aristotle Onassis in New York City. CIA documents indicate
that Maheu stated that he had technical coverage (wiretap)
of Onassis' New York apartment and that he used one of his
employees, John Frank, to perform electronic surveillance.
The CIA documents also indicate that Maheu hired a technician
by the name of "Leon" to perform this surveillance and that
the CIA "may have" been given some of the information
received by Maheu from this technical coverage. Maheu can
provide an explanation for exactly what he did and what con-
nection he had with the Agency in this venture against
Aristotle Onassis.
(b) Procuring Females and Producing Films
of Foreign Leaders for the CIA
Maheu was used by the CIA in 1957, 1958, and
1959 on three different projects involving leaders of foreign
countries, i.e. heads of state. The first such project was
entitled "Project Happy Days' and occurred in 1957, In this
project Maheu was requested by the CIA to rent a movie studio
in California and make up an actor to look like a foreign
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 15
-13-
head of state. Maheu was to produce a film with the
actor and an actress simulating an intimate relationship.
The CIA then, through its Technical Division, provided a
backdrop for the film, which would make the completed film
appear to be a film of the foreign leader having an affair
in Russia. The Agency was then to distribute the film in
the leader's, country to embarrass him and to make him angry
at the Soviets. CIA documents indicate that while the
film was completed and sent to the Office of Security of the
CIA, it was never distrubuted abroad. The second project
which the Agency asked Maheu to complete was entitled
"Project HARPSTAR." In this 1958 project, Maheu was requested
to and did obtain a woman to send overseas to try and "culti-
vate" the same foreign leader about which the film was made.
The woman was apparently sent overseas but it is unclear
exactly what she did with regard to the foreign leader.
Maheu should be able to provide the details. Maheu was in-
volved with the CIA in still a third project which was en-
titled "Project NORFOLK." In this project, Maheu was asked
to and did provide "female companionship" in June of 1959
for foreign leader %32% (this head of state of a foreign
country is different from the foreign leader heretofore
referred to in Projects Happy Days and HARPSTAR). Maheu
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 16
-14-
introduced this woman, who was described as a "part-time
actress" and she was instructed that the CIA "wanted her
to go to bed" with the foreign leader. The CIA rented a
house in Long Island for the female and the leader to stay
at, and they did stay there during the month of June 1959.
The CIA documents also reveal that mail sent between the
female and the leader was opened and that they were other-
wise surveilled.
Maheu may explain upon whose authority
this was done and to what extent the CIA was involved.
Maheu will be able to testify about the exact instruc-
tions he received and the persons he dealt with at the CIA
in these three projects which were mounted against leaders
of foreign countries. Maheu may also be able to provide
any hearsay knowledge that he might have about the use of
the CIA's Technical Services Division for other such pro-
jects or programs. Note: TSD also produced the poison
pills for Castro and, allegedly, poison virus for Lumumba.
(c) Maheu's Provision of Commercial Cover
Facilities for CIA Agents
Maheu provided the CIA with (1) use of Maheu's
office as a live address for cover, (2) assistance in ob-
taining safehouses, (3) use of Maheu to provide cover employ-
ment for CIA personnel both in the United States and abroad.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 17
-15-
In this regard, CIA documents establish that Maheu provided
cover for a CIA employee in Washington, D. C. (who was
ostensibly employed in Maheu's Washington office) from
September 1964 to June 1966. It is unknown exactly what
this employee did in the United States. Additionally, CIA
documents establish that Maheu provided cover for a CIA
employee in Ecuador from August 1968 to December 1970.
Again, it is unknown exactly what this Agency employee did
in that country. Maheu should know details.
(d) Miscellaneous Activities of Maheu for CIA
International Labor
CIA documents seem to
indicate that Maheu was requested to provide the CIA with an
The documents
entree into the international labor field.
reference Maheu's involvement with David J. MacDonald, former
President of the United Steel Workers, state that information
was passed from CIA Commercial Cover Division employees to
Maheu. The details and import of this are unknown at the
present time, and, of course, Maheu should be able to elab-
orate on what, if anything, was involved in this.
Howard Hughes Organization Much of the contact
between Maheu and the CIA occurred when Maheu was either
attempting to line up Hughes as a major client or actually
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 18
-16-
in the employ of Hughes. Agency documents indicate that
Maheu was involved in the use of Hughes for non-official
cover in 1962-1964 when the aircraft division of Howard
Hughes Tool Company in Culver City, California was utilized
by the CIA. The documents do not provide any details as
to what this is all about. Additionally, CIA documents
indicate that Maheu placed a telephone call in December 1970
to the CIA complaining that the CIA was using Hughes to
"embark on a new project without going through Maheu."
This information is again fragmentary and Maheu could perhaps
provide the full story.
For the reasons outlined above, it is submitted that
Maheu possess sufficient information about matters within
the Committee's mandate to make him a valuable witness for
the Committee.
Therefore, he should be granted "use immunity"
so that he might be compelled to testify before the Commit-
tee. As aforementioned, "use immunity" will not prevent
the prosecution of Maheu by any federal or state authority,
should either desire to prosecute and should they have
"independent evidence" with which to so prosecute him.
must be stated, however, that ultimate prosecution of a
person like Maheu who was involved in events some ten to
It
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 19
-17-
fifteen years ago is highly unlikely. In any event,
Maheu's grant of immunity will allow the Committee to
rapidly proceed in its fact-finding process in determining
to what extent the CIA engaged in activities in violation
of its charter.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423549 Page 20

