157-10011-10069
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER: 157-10011-10069
RECORDS SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM: KNOCHE, E. H., ASST. TO DCI
TO: BELIN, DAVID W. EXEC. DIRECTOR
TITLE :
LETTERS TO ROCKEFELLER COMMISSION FROM CIA
DATE: 05/00/75
PAGES: 21
SUBJECTS :
PROJECT JMMOVE
CIARDS EXTRACT, ALLEGED ILLEGAL DOMESTIC ACTIVITIES
BAY OF PIGS
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : S
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/29/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
SSCI Box 287, Folder 9
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 1
[R]
[R]
Date: 10/06/93
Page: 1
(
SECRET
Project JMMOVE
The following is a summary of the attached extract of the OS files
pertaining to the incarceration of four persons in 1961.
Project JMMOVE is an Agency cryptonym covering paramilitary training
activities at a location in Louisana! This training activity took place during
the period 12 February 1961 through 12 April 1961 and was in support of the
general Agency effort culminating in the abortive Cuban invasion. In support
of the JMMOVE mission a holding facility was required for dissident trainees.
The holding facility was a jail which was turned over for exclusive Agency
use by a local Louisana sheriff. During the course of the training at JMMOVE,
four individuals were involuntarily detained in this jail. The individuals were
three Cuban trainees held in the jail from 9 April until 20 April 1961 and a
Spanish ship captain held from 29 March 1961 until 20 April 1961.
The captain, who jumped ship on 28 May 1961, was in charge of a ship which
was transporting ammunition in support of the Cuban invasion. It was deter-
mined that the individuals knowledge of the JMMOVE operation presented a
security problem for the entire Cuban invasion operation. The captain was
taken into custody by the United States Border Patrol in New Orleans who,
upon instruction from the District Director, Immigration and Naturalization
Service, turned him over to the custody of Agency representatives. The
captain was then transported to the jail where he remained in the control of
the deputy sheriff in charge of the jail until 20 April 1961. After 20 April 1961,
the captain was transported to New York City where he was turned over to
I & NS who took custody of him until he left the country on 19 May 1961.
The three Cubans were jailed for several reasons, all relating to their
reluctance or inability to carry out their training. Release from the project
site was determined to create a security hazard and they were also held in
the jail until after the invasion. Upon their release each of the individuals
was given a small amount of money and allowed to return to their choice of
residence in the United States.
The foregoing is a summary of several Office of Security reports attached,
which were written after the fact. These reports and other Office of Security
files do not document the precise level of approval for the operation, insofar
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
AS SANITIZED -
Je
3 AMAR 94
(1)(B)
(2)
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 2
• SECRET
(
SECRET
as it involved the detention of these individuals. It is clear however, from a
review of the files, that the jailing was the subject of a variety of correspondence
between JMMOVE, Headquarters, and the Miami Station. In the case of the
ship captain, the operation from his apprehension until the time he left the
United States appears to have been accomplished in a close coordination with
I&NS.
(NOTE: Reference to CIARDS in Para 1 the attached memorandum refers to
the Central Intelligence Retirement and Disability System. Employees may
qualify for this program if they have 5 years overseas service or an equivalent
amount of domestic service determined to meet certain criteria of hazard
or uniqueness. Initial information regarding the subject of this report was
obtained through a general review of employees CLARDS applications.)
(NOTE: The following cryptonyms are used in the attached extract.)
SEAL
OS crypt referring to the OS support of DDO Miami based
Cuban operations
IMATE
Cuban Operations
AMHAZE
Cuban infiltration team originating at Ft. Sheridan
AMNORM
IMMOVE
Unable to identify. From the context in which it is used
in the attached extract it appears the crypt refers to another
group of Cuban trainees.
Paramilitary training base at U.S. Naval Ammunition Depot
Belle Chasse La
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 3
SECRET
(
SECRET
MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD
(
1 May 1975
SUBJECT: Alleged Illegal Domestic Activities
(CIARDS Extract --
)
1. Reference is made to an undated, blind memorandum
from the Inspector General containing certain information
extracted from the CIARDS applications of Office of Security
personnel. The following is an extract from the CIARDS
application of O/S employee:
"This activity involved establishing
and maintaining liaison with the Super-
intendent and Assistant Superintendent
the Louisiana State Police; FBI;
Superintendent of the New
Orleans Police Department; Plaquimines
Parish Sheriff's office and deputies,
whose cooperation and assistance proved
invaluable in handling black movements
of trainees, movement of ammunition and.
high explosives, to and from the base.
The Sheriff of Plaquimines Parish, at my
request, made available a holding
facility which consisted of an entire
jail and jailer at Port Sulphur, La..
for the incarceration and retention of
hard-core or troublesome trainees who
threatened to leave the Base. The jail
was also utilized to hold a Spanish Captain
of one of the cargo ships which had been
loaded at the Braithwaite Dock on the
Mississippi River with fuel, ammunition,
high explosives and other equipment for
the invasion. The Captain jumped ship
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 4
SECRET
E2 IMPDET
CL BY 063994
(
for the purpose of returning to
Havana to join his wife, who was
pregnant. Through the cooperation
of the I&NS, the Border Patrol, with
whom liaison had previously been
established, the Captain was apprehended,
and with the assistance of the
Plaquinines Parish deputies, the Captain
was confined in the jail at Port Sulphur
until after the invasion. He was then
removed from jail and flown to New York
City, where he was granted a thirty-day
extension by I&NS to await the arrival
of his wife and newborn son, before pro-
ceeding to his home in Spain. Additional
liaison was established with the Navy,
Coast Guard, Army, Armed Forces Police
Detachment in New Orleans, all of whom
provided invaluable support during the
operation."
2.
Subject
is the subject of Office of
Security file number 70 837
The file reflects that he
was retired from the Agency on 8 June 1973 but contains no
information relative to the foregoing. However, from March
1961 through May 1961,
he was assigned to DDP/WH Division,
Branch 4, Project JMATE, New Orleans, Louisiana.
3. Volume 16, Office of Security file number 219 000
(319-357) concerns Project SEAL, containing information con-
cerning Office of Security operational support of the DDP
relative to the Bay of Pigs invasion. (For facility of
further access, copies of all pertinent documents from this
file relative to the matter at hand have been placed in
Office of Security file number 536 198, "Belle Chasse Loui-
siana, Ammunition Depot, subcaptioned Project JMMOVE.) The
file contains a copy of a memorandum prepared by Subject
dated 12 May 1961, captioned "JMMOVE" directed to the
Chief, WH/4/Security, reporting on activities at JMMOVE from
14 February 1961 to 21 April 1961.
The following are verbatim
extracts from this memorandum:
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 5
2
SECRET
"LCDR. James E. PHILLIPS, M.D., (U.S. Naval
Station, Algiers, Louisiana) arranged for and
removed a piece of shrapnal from the ankle area
of an AMHAZE trainee; arranged for and assisted
in performing an emergency appendectomy on ANNORM
trainee,
3225, and provided
In
general medical care for trainees at JNMOVE.
addition, he made a number of trips to the jail
Lat Port Sulphur, Louisiana, to examine trainees
who were in detention there."
"During the latter part of February 1961,
liaison was established with the Plaquamine
Parish Sheriff's office, Ports La Hague, Loui
Siana. Subsequently, Sheriff
and Deputy Sheriff's
were briefed
regarding the JMMOVE activity and the nationality
of the trainees. They were not briefed as to CIA
sponsorship. Sheriff
was questioned re-
garding the possibility of utilizing a local jail
in the event it became necessary to incarcerate
one or more of the trainees at some future date.
He immediately advised that he had a jail at Port
Sulphur, Louisiana, which he would make available
if the need should arise. He explained that the
jailer,
was a Deputy Sheriff and
the jail would afford privacy since few p prisoners
were placed there. It was also agreed that there
would be no records maintained if trainees were
incarcerated and that members of his staff would
deny that such trainees had ever been incarcerated
in the event of future inquiries by representatives
of the news media.
"Subsequently, it was necessary to incarcerate
three trainees and the former Captain of the SS
Houston at the above jail. This matter will be
treated in detail later in this report.
"During the JMMOVE activity, members of the
Sheriff's Office were most helpful, especially,
Officers
in assisting with
the handling and jailing of the above individuals;
providing escorts for trainee and cargo moves
from JMMOVE to the MAS or vice versa; conducting
レ
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 6
3
periodic patrols to the front and rear gates
of JNMOVE to keep fishermen and poachers out
of the base and reporting local gossip re-
garding speculation as to the type of activity
conducted within the base.
"On 28 February 1961, the
Assist-
Chief Patrol Inspector;
ant Chief Patrol Inspector; and
Senior Patrol Inspector, U.S. Border Patrol,
New Orleans, Louisiana, were briefed regarding
the JNMOVE activity but not CIA sponsorship."
"Subsequently, the Border Patrol was very
helpful in forcing fourteen crew members who
had threatened to "jump ship," to stay aboard
the Caribe after it had loaded at the Braithe
waite Docks. Also, they assisted by taking into
custody and holding Captain
of the
S.S. Houston, until JNMOVE security representa-
tives could assume custody."
"On 16 March 1961,
District Director, (Immigration & Naturalization
Service), with offices in the Masonic Building,
New Orleans, La, was briefed regarding the JANOVE
activity and Agency sponsorship as per Headquarters
instructions.
He and the
Deputy District Director, subsequently provided
valuable assistance to JANOVE in apprehending and
detaining
the Captain of the SoS.
Houston, who was subsequently placed in jail at
Port Sulphur, La., until after the ill-fated inva-
sion on the target area. In addition, the Deputy District Director
provided the reporting agent with the name of
the District Director of Immigration &
Naturalization Service, New York City, as the per-
son to contact prior to the release of the Captain.
This matter will be discussed in more detail later
in this report."
DETENTION CASES:
"At 1500 hours on 28 March 1961, Mr. Frank
Love, Logistics representative, in charge of
4
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 7
SECRET
loading ammunition on vessels at the Braithwaite
Docks, telephonically advised the reporting agent
that a crew member from the Lake Charles and the
Capt. from the S.S. Houston had jumped ship after
the vessels had loaded and anchored downstream in
the Mississippi River. The individuals were iden-
tified as
approximately 44 years old,
a former American who had renounced his U.S. citi-
zenship and who is now a naturalized citizen of
Cuba, and one
Captain of the SS
Houston, approximately 39 years old and of Spanish
origin
reportedly left the Lake Charles on
27 March 1961 with the river pilot, after the
vessel was moved from the loading site to the
anchorage point downstream. A subsequent check
with
the District Director,
had been granted polit-
I&NS, revealed that
ical asylum by I&NS at New Orleans on 28 March
1961, ar and, according to I&NS records, he had de-
parted New Orleans, Orleans presumably by bus, at 1000
hours on 28 March March 1961, enroute to Miami, Florida.
I&NS records listed
forwarding address as
Miami, Florida. The informa-
was furnished telephonically
Headquarters, on the night
tion regarding
to
of 28 March 1961, in the event Headquarters de-
cided an attempt should be made to apprehend
on his arrival in Miami.
:
left the
"According to Mr. LONE, Capt.
S.S. Houston on 28 March 1961, after which he re-
ported to his employer, Hansen & Tidemann, Inc.,
with offices in New Orleans! He refused to return
to the vessel. The captain insisted that his reason
for leaving was the fact that his wife was preg-
nant and expecting to give birth to a child in
approximately 10 days. He was afraid the birth
would be by caesaeran section and he was concerned
for her safety. He wanted to return to Cuba at
the earliest possible date.
"The District Director was contacted telephonically by
the reporting agent.
He was advised that in
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 8
5
SECRET
view of the Captain'sknowledge of the cargo on board
the S.S. Houston and his probable knowledge of
the use for which the cargo was intended, it
would create a serious security hazard if he was
released, and especially, if he should return to
Cuba. It was decided that there were 3 possible
ways of handling the matter. First, to release
him and permit him to remain in the area run-
ning the risk that he might contact his wife and/
or return to Cuba. This was ruled out on security
aboard the
grounds. Secondly, to force him
vessel and place him under the custody of the
Captain replacing him. This was believed too
risky since it was feared the crew would be more
loyal to him than to his replacement. Further-
more, if he should regain command of the vessel,
he might divert the craft to Cuba. Thirdly, to
detain him until after the invasion.
3.
"The above situation was discussed telephoni-
on the
cally with Headquarters personnel
night of 28 March 1961. Subsequently, authoriza-
to incarcerate the
tion was received from Hqs.
Subject.
"At approximately 2330 hours on 28 March 1961, a
Special Agent
agent were accompanied by Deputies
and the reporting
He
auto-
of the Plaquemine Parish Sheriff's Office
to the Headquarters of the U.S. Border Patrol,
wherethe Capt. was being held in custody.
was placed in the spee rear seat of the deputies'
mobile between the/ Speciaanden he reporting agent, and
transported to a spot near the Naval Air Station
Kat Belle Chasse, Louisiana, where he was handcuffed
and transferred to the rear of the panel truck.
An MP assigned to the Security
T
Office, drove the truck and Deputy Sheriff
rode in the front seat while the Special Agent and the re-
porting agent rode withthe Capt. in the rear. Dep
uty Sheriff Cockroll preceded the truck in his
patrol car to the jail at Port Sulphur, Louisiana,
a distance of approximately 40 miles.
placed in the jail on the morning of 29 March 1961.
The jailer, a Deputy Sheriff Rene
was
instructed to do everything possible to make him
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 9
6
SECRET
comfortable and to purchase the necessary clothing
he might need as well as magazines and newspapers
to help him pass the time. The jailer was re-
quested not to provide
him with a local news-
paper since it would reveal his location. An in-
quiry was made as to whether or not a radio station
was located in the town of Port Sulphur. When it.
was learned that no such station existed, the Captain
was informed that a radio would be provided for
him at a later date. He was visited approxi-
mately two times each week at which time he was
provided with English and Spanish newspapers and
magazines.
A staff employee,
acted as interpreter on three of the visits.
Subject was permitted to write letters to his
wife, one of which was mailed after being censored.
An inquiry was made, at the Subject's
request, through his office in New York City, re-
garding his wife's health. When it was learned
that she had given normal birth to a son, Subje ct
was so informed.
Subject was very cooperative during the period
of detention, from 28 March 1961 to 20 April 1961,
and approximately one week before he was released,
he was provided with a two band, eight transistor
radio. This radio was subsequently given to the
jailer in appreciation for his cooperation and the
services he had provided, not only for Subject, but
in handling three other trainees who were subse-
quently placed in jail. A receipt obtained from
the jailer for the radio is attached hereto as
Exhibit No. 1. Food for Subject and the three
trainees was purchased, as ordered, by the jailer
from a local restaurant.
"Subject's personnel effects were subsequently
turned over to
the Hansen_&_Tide-
mann firm. Approximately a week later, the re-
porting agent assumed custody of the effects, con-
sisting of a large suitcase, a leather briefcase,
a small cloth handbag and a red, metal tool box.
The above items were placed in the vault at the
base for safekeeping.
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837
Page 10
7
SECRET
"Subsequently, a cursory check for weapons
was being made of the above effects before taking
certain items of clothing to Subject at the jail.
It was discovered that the personal effects con-
tained items of considerable value including U.S.
and Cuban currency; gold coins; a valuable engag-
ment ring containing a diamond estimated at five
karats; plus other items. Also, there were several
letters with currency enclosed or attached and the
envelopes contained stateside and foreign addresses.
"On 13 April 1961, Sgt.
و
Special Agent
Shanks and the reporting agent inventoried the
articles of monetary value and/or of intelligence
significance. A copy of the inventory is attached
hereto as Exhibit No. 2. It should be noted that
this copy of the inventory contains the signature
of Subject obtained in New York City at the time of
his release, acknowledging the receipt of the items
inventoried.
"At 2130 hours on 9 April 1961, the following
AMNORM trainees were committed to the jail at Port
Sulphur, Louisiana, for refusing to train with the
Batallion and/or threatening to escape from the
base:
a. R-3208
b.
R-3236
c.
R-3232
"It should be noted that R-3232
R-3236
was a former agitator and deserter from Guatemala,
and he had refused to train with the Batallion at
JMNOVE
was unable to train and
accompany the Battalion in view of a recent emer-
gency appendectomy. Insufficient time had elapsed
to permit the incision to heal adequately for him
to participate in training activities. Furthermore,
and in-
he was a close personal friend of R-3232
formation was received from other trainees that
they were planning to escape. R-3208
had been very lackadaisical and refused to
participate in training activities. Eventually, he
was transferred to the dispensary with the complaint
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 11
8
SECRET
that he was suffering from rheumatism. Informa-
tion was subsequently received from the S-2 of
the Battalion that Mario had planned to escape
and make his way back to Miami.
"Incarceration of the above trainees was
based on the short time element existing prior
to "D" Day; their threats to escape from the
base, and finally, at the personal request of
Battalion Commander, and his
staff, who feared the Subjects could cost them
their lives and/or jeopardize the entire mission
if they should escape.
"The above individuals were transported to
the jail in the rear of the panel truck by
and the reporting agent.
The truck was escorted by Deputies.
They were placed on the opposite side of
the jail from Subject and they were unable to see
outside the jail or to communicate with Subject
These men remained in the jail until 20 April 1961.
"Approximately 2 days after being committed
developed a rather
to jail, R-3208
serious case of asthma, which required that he be
checked bya Doctor
three days in succes-
sion. Immediately after the Battalion had been
dispatched from ONMOVE on their assignment, R-3208
was removed from the jail and returned to the
dispensary at UNMOVE This left Subject and 2
trainees in jail.
"On 18 January (sic) 1961
the reporting agent returned to Head-
quarters, Washington, D.C.
of
"On 20 April 1961
the reporting
agent returned to New Orleans at the instructions
Headquarters, to effect the
release of the two trainees and Subject who were
still in jail. In addition, three trainees, whọ
were in a motel on the outskirts of New Orleans,
were to be released.
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 12
9
SECRET
"Immediately upon arrival, arrangements were
made to release the three trainees at the motel.
AMHAZE trainee,
#2736,
was given one hundred dollars and provided with
a ticket to his home in New York City.
not escorted. Trainees R-3208
He was
and another ANNORM trainee, who was unable to
accompany the Battalion and whose name is unknown,
were escorted to Miami, Florida, by Corporal
Joseph DETATA, an MP assigned to the Security
Office.
R-3232
"During the afternoon of 20 April 1961,
and
R-3236
were removed from the jail at Port Sulphur by
Blacked out
the reporting agent.
glasses were placed on each man prior to leaving
the jail and they wore the glasses until the
vehicle arrived at the outskirts of New Orleans).
Neither man could observe his surroundings until
the glasses were removed. They were taken in a
rental sedan to Moisant Airport, where they were
given one hundred dollars each and provided with
They were
airline tickets to Miami, Florida.
escorted by
MP's assigned to the Security Office.
the
"At approximately 2200 hours on 20 April 1961,
Subject was removed from the jail by
reporting agent, in the same manner as described
above, and taken to New York City on the morning
of 21 April 1961. The group stayed at the Commo-
dore Hotel until an appointment could be arranged
with
District Director of I&NS, New
---
York City. Subject was taken to the I&NS office
at 1500 hours, 21 April 1961, at which time, the
case was discussed with I&NS
is-
sued a voluntary departure form on behalf of Subject
which would permit him to remain in New York City
until 1 June 1961. This was to provide sufficient
time for him to arrange for the departure of his
wife and infant son from Havanna, Cuba. Subject
instructed to report on Monday of each week to
I&NS personally, and to advise him of any change
in his address. He was also told that should he
desire an extension beyond 1 June 1961, he was to
contact I&NS personally, and no one else.
>
was
:
10
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 13
SECRET
"At approximately 1700 hours on 21 April
1961, Subject was taken to 17 Battery Place,
New York City, where he was met by his employer,
Mr. Alfredo GARCIA of the firm, Naviera Del Golfo
Company Here, UCHUPI's personal effects were
given to him and he was given one hundred dollars.
The reporting agent returned
to Washington, D.C., on 22 April 1961."
4. The file contains a memorandum to the Chief, WH/4/
Security, captioned 'NNOVE! dated 8 June 1961 prepared by
a retired Office of Security employee, re-
porting on his 30-day TDY to New Orleans, Louisiana, to
relieve an O/S Officer
commencing on 12 April 1961.
was scheduled to depart on 18 April 1961. In this memorandum
commented as follows:
"In addition to the three Cubans in the motel
at New Orleans, four others were being held in
custody by Deputy Sheriff
Mata Port
Sulphur, Louisiana, These four were in custody
for reasons of security and were being held until
it was determined that potential security repercus-
sions connected with their release no longer ex-
isted. Arrangements for their maintenance had
previously been made by O/S officer and Deputy Sheriff.
The public had no knowledge of their
presence at Port Sulphur. Arrangements for their
release from the area were made on 20 April 1961,
the same date on which the three from the notel
in New Orleans departed the area. Details con-
cerning the movement of these seven Cubans are
included in a report prepared by the O/S officer."
5. A memorandum to the file dated 21 April 1961 pre-
pared by Harry J. Murphy, Chief, Alien Affairs Staff (Office
of Security), subject:
Captain states as follows:
"O/S officer
called on 21 April and said
that subject was a ship captain who was detained
in New Orleans at the request of
the District Field Office, and at the present
time, subject andO/S officer
are in Room 2254
!
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 14
11
SECRET
of the Commodore Hotel in New York City. O/S official
is using a pseudonym. O/S officer
said
that subject would be turned over to I&NS and
whatever disposition they might want.
Headquarters representative wascalled for further details.
He said that subject had been a bona fide cap-
tain of a ship owned by the GARCIA brothers
The ship arrived in New Orleans, and was going
out with a sensitive cargo. Subject refused
to go, and at that time O/S Officer made the neces-
sary arrangements. According to the Headquarters representative Sub-
ject is not an "SP" and he "has been placated." The Headquarters
representative said subject is contacting his ship's
company in New York City, and that subject
should be made available to I&NS at the earli-
est opportunity. This information was called
to
I&NS
, who advised that someone
should get a message to the O/S officer to sit tight in
the hotel room. Subsequently, I&NS
advised
that he had been in contact with District
Director
and he requested that O/S official
bring the subject to the I&N Office, 20
West Broadway, New York City, and he would
handle it from there.
said that
I&NS would encourage him to seek a berth on
a ship.
"Headquarters rep. was advised and told to get a message to
O/S official
to bring subject to 20 West
Broadway immediately."
6.
A memorandum for the file dated 24 April 1961 pre-
pared by Harry J. Murphy, Chief, Alien Affairs Staff, subject:
states as follows:
Captain
"On 21 April 1961, in the following conver-
sation with Headquarters representative, I&NS reported that
subject andO/S official
had arrived at the New
York District Office of I&NS and the following
agreement was made:
"That subject be given one month's
time to arrange his own and his rela-
tives' departure to his native land
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 15
12
SECRET
and that he be permitted
to be at large until 1 June 1961.
This matter was being handled by
the Deputy District Director in
New York."
電 I&NS
querried as to whether this would
be agreeable with our Agency.
"Headquarters was called and he said the
above arrangement was agreeable to the Agency.
I&NS was so informed."
7.
A memorandum from Harry J. Murphy, Chief, Alien Affairs
Staff dated 12 May 1961 to the Chief of Security, WH/4 Division
through the Director of Security, subject:
as follows:
"On 12 May 1961
Captain
Immigration
and Naturalization Service, advised this Office
that the Subject is departing from the United
States at New York City for for Spain on 15 May 1961,
aboard TWA Flight 900.
"FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SECURITY:"
0
8. Office of Security file number 536 198 captioned
states
Belle Chasse Louisiana Ammunition Depot," subcaptioned
"Project JNMOVE," was established in late 1967/early 1968
in response to requirements from DDP/CI/R&A for information
concerning Agency activities in and about New Orleans, Loui-
The
Siana, relative to Cuban training for the Bay of Pigs.
DDP/CI/R&A inquiry was prompted by inquiries into the assassi-
nation of President John F. Kennedy conducted by the New
Orleans District Attorney "Jim" Garrison. Material drawn
together at the time of the Garrison inquiry included a 7
June 1961 memorandum for the Chief, WH/4, sent
captioned "Report on MMOVE" prepared by
Chief of Base, JMOVE, covering the activities
of JAMOVE in support of JNATE. Included in this report by Chief
of Base
are the following pertinent comments:
"UMMOVE was the cryptonym designating the
Agency training base established at the US
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837 Page 16
13
SECRET
Naval Ammunition Depot at Belle Chase (sic),
Louisiana, during the period 12 February 1961
through 12 April 1961. This Base located
eight miles from the city of New Orleans,
Louisiana, had been inactive for five years...."
:
"The initial mission assigned to the Base
was to hold, condition and conduct limited
training for thirty men organized into small
infiltration teams, and to prepare these teams
for operational employment. On activation of
the Base, the mission was immediately expanded
to include the reception and training of 149
men for organization into small guerrilla war-
fare teams; reorganization and training of the
149 men......training of raider teams.....devel-
opment of necessary support facilities...."
Under Objectives, Chief of Basef included:
".....Maintain maximum external security in
such a fashion as to deny knowledge of the
activities of the Base to the local populace.
In addition, holding, training and movements
of trainees had to be accomplished in such a
gashion as to deny to trainees identification
of the Base, i.c.... i.e. the Belle Chase Naval Ammun 17
tion Depot......"
"Develop effective liaison arrangements.....
This included liaison with.....U.S. Border Patrol,
New Orleans, ans......if we so desired, to arrange that
the Border Patrol pick up and retain trainees in
our behalf;.....Immigration and Naturalization
Office New Orleans.....to establish procedures
whereby this office would assist us if we had any
disposal or detention cases."
Under base and operational security, Strickler
listed: "....the following steps were taken to
maintain maximum cover and security:.....the re-
moval of agitators, defectors, or r suspected Castro
agents to safehouses and/or the Sheriff's jail."
NW 50955 DocId: 32203837
Page 17
14
SECRET
Under security incidents, Chief of Base listed:
On 28 March 1961, the Captain of the SS
Houston left the vessel after it had been loaded
and refused to reboard the vessel. The Captain
had been briefed quite thoroughly, so it is
understood, regarding the mission of the vessel.
It was felt that the success of the mission would
be seriously jeopardized if he were permitted to
go free and return to his wife in Cuba, as he
desired. Through the cooperation of the Immigra-
tion and Naturalization Service and the U.S.
Border Patrol, he was taken into custody and de-
tained until Security representatives could place
him in a nearby jail for the duration. The jail
facility was provided by a local Sheriff sheriff with
whom the Security Officer had established liai-
son. No records are maintained of the incarcera-
tion and the sheriff and his deputies, have prom-
ised to deny that anyone was incarcerated should
there be any future inquiries by reporters.
Captain was removed from the jail on 20 April
1961 taken to New York City, where arrangements
were made with the District Director, I&NS, to
allow him to remain in the area until 1 June
1961, when he expected to obtain the release of
his wife and infant son from Cuba