157-10014-10219
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
7/7/2015
Agency Information
AGENCY:
SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER:
157-10014-10219
RECORD SERIES :
MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
07-M-124
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
SSCIA
FROM:
WALLACH, PAUL
TO:
SCHWARZ, FRITZ
TITLE:
DATE:
07/22/1975
PAGES:
13
SUBJECTS:
OPERATION MONGOOSE
MCMANUS, GEORGE
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
SUMMARY
Unclassified
IB; IC
Redact
05/31/2000
CC Box 254
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 1
1
!
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
Date: 08/08/95
Page: 1
AGENCY: SSCÍA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10014-10219
RECORDS SERIES : MISCELLANEOUS RECORDS OF THE CHURCH COMMITTEE
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : 07-M-124
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : SSCIA
FROM : WALLACH, PAUL
TO: SCHWARZ, FRITZ
TITLE :
DATE: 07/22/75
PAGES: 13
SUBJECTS : MCMANUS, GEORGE
OPERATION MONGOOSE
DOCUMENT TYPE : SUMMARY
CLASSIFICATION: UNCLASSIFIED
RESTRICTIONS : REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: POSTPONED IN FULL
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 01/20/99
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: CC Box 254
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 2
MCMANUS, George-W1
254-4
50955 Doeld: 32423607
MEMORANDUM
TO : Fritz Schwarz
FROM: Paul Wallach
DATE: July 22, 1975
RE
:
Staff Interview of George McManus (Monday, July 21, 1975)
As we discussed last week, I asked George McManus to come
down for an interview Monday evening. The interview lasted approxi-
mately three hours; the substance of that interview
as reconstructed
from both Joe DiGenova's and my own notes is reflected in the at-
tached memorandum.
McManus should make a brief appearance before the Committee.
He worked closely with both Helms and Harvey, and his testimony will
allow a different perspective on the Mongoose operations and the as-
sassination issues.
McManus will also testify as to his perceptions of Robert
Kennedy, and Messrs. Helms, Lansdale, McCone, and Harvey. More spe-
cifically, McManus may show us that Helms was not as "on top" of the
Cuban operations as he would have had us believe on June 13 a posi-
tion from which he attempted to back away during his most recent Com-
mittee appearance.
cc: William Miller
Curtis Smothers
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607
Page 4
12
Historical Data:
McManus retired in May 1970 after some 20 plus years
of covert/clandestine agency service. In the early 1950s
he headed up the CIA's European Defector Interrogation
Center. He was subsequently appointed Canadian Station
Chief and later Director of the Cover Staff.
In mid-December 1961, Helms asked McManus to apply his
European expertise to the Agency's Cuban Defector Inter-
rogation Center. McManus headed for Florida on Christmas
Day and spent the following week at the Opa Locha Center.
He reported directly to Helms on his findings, conclu-
sions, and suggestions in a memorandum dated January 3,
1962.*
McManus recalls that the "center" was then inopera-
tive; he called for an immediate operational restructuring.
McManus stressed the importance of the positive intelligence
that the Center could, and indeed eventually did provide
at the time of the Missle Crisis.
It was not until early January 1962 that Helms formally
brought McManus "on board" as his assistant for "Cuban
activities. The initial weeks were dedicated to ensuring
that the revitalized Center got off the ground; subsequent
*This afternoon I requested a copy of McManus' January 3
memorandum.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 5
"
2
weeks allowed for attention to the full panoply of Cuban
activities. McManus describes himself as "Helms' eyes and
ears" in the Cuban area.
McManus spent his final years with the Agency as
Director of Cover (1963-1965), Assistant to Admiral Rayburn
(DCI: 1965-1967), and as Station Chief in Europe (1967-
1970).
10
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 6
McManus on the meeting in RFK's office (January 19, 1962):
McManus--at Richard Helms' side--attended the January
19 meeting.
McManus was to take notes to ensure that
McCone was adequately briefed and to substantively support
Helms should RFK ask about the CIA's Cuban Defector Center.
One copy each of McManus' handwritten and typed notes
(the latter with numerous typographical errors) are attached
hereto.
Surprisingly enough, the January 19 meeting was McManus'
first Cuban operations "briefing". McManus recalled that
RFK "firmly" stressed the need to do something about Cuba.
He analogized the Attorney General's remarks to those of a
football coach's during halftime.
(albiet, a Don Schula
and not a Vince Lombardi). However, RFK did not specifically
delineate what was to be done;
tional Chief, Edward Lansdale.
this was left to the Opera-
stating--in addition to the alleged direct quotes as set
McManus now recalls RFK
forth in his memorandum--"we've got to get on with it",
and "we've got to get this fellow off our necks". McManus
was naturally surprised by the high priority which the At-
torney General placed on Cuban activities.
The quotation marks in McManus' handwritten notes were
intended to reflect verbatim statements by the Attorney
General. However, McManus--who was at that time was just
"a beginner in Cuban operations" hastened to add that this
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 7
9
2
was not a question and answer session; without attempting to
understand this meaning he penned the Attorney General's
words.
(With the exception of discussion relating to Opa
Locha Center--see typed memo, at paragraph 3).
McManus assumed that RFK was speaking for the President.
McManus "never got anything off the ground as fast as he
did the Cuban Refugee Center". However, at no time did
McManus discuss the meeting or RFK's statements with either
McCone or Helms. At the meeting McManus thought in terms
of increasing our positive Cuban intelligence.
really tie RFK's stress into sabotage operations.
He did not
Aside from the January 19 meeting McManus claims that
he was not aware of continuing Cuban pressures emmanated
from the Attorney General. According to McManus, Helms met
regularly with the PResident and "much less often with the
Attorney General." McManus neither was present nor discussed
the substance of those meetings with Helms.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 8
McManus on being Helms' assistant for Cuban operations:
As Helms' assistant for Cuban activities, McManus was in
daily contact with both Helms and Harvey. Moreover, he
often assisted Task Force W in responding to and indeed
often implementing Lansdale's plethora of requests.
Soon after the January 19 meeting, Harvey was brought in
as Director of the Cuban Task Force. McManus understood
that part of his job was to keep track of Harvey who was
"quite an independent fellow", and not "extremely forthcom-
ing with information". McManus explained that Helms shared
his feeling that "we had to get off our asses and get mov-
ing on Cuba". However, Helms as DDP had "lots of other impor-
tant concerns."
McManus prepared a weekly report for Helms wherein
he summarized intelligence information and the operational
work of Task Force W. Apparently, the operational section
was prepared by Harvey and simply reviewed by McManus prior
to transmittal to Helms. Helms in turn reviewed the draft
report. The final version was eventually disseminated
to seven recipients, including"inter alia, McCone, Lansdale,
Defense, and the White House."
Although McManus was Helms' "Cuban eyes and ears" he
disclaims any knowledge of discussions, plans or attempts
relating to the assassination/elimination/liquidation of
Fidel Castro.
Although we did not show McManus specific
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 9
>
2
documentation of assassination attempts (for the reasons
discussed last week), we informed McManus generally as to
the nature of the plans and attempts, their time sequence,
and the cast of characters. McManus admitted that he was
surprised that these were just now being called to his at-
tention. He told us that assassination was "a completely
different ball game". Indeed he stated that assassination
was in his opinion senseless; "viz., our leaders would have
been sitting ducks".
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 10
6
McManus on General Lansdale:
McManus described Lansdale as "Kook", "wild-man", and as
"just plain crazy". He told us that Lansdale was similarly
viewed by most others at the Agency. Unfortunately, Lansdale
was "sponsored by the Kennedys" and "as good soldiers the CIA
had to cooperate."
McManus vividly recounted Lansdale forays into the sabotage
arena. He presented his initial laundry list of Cuban action pro-
posals early in 1962, of course, he expected immediate CIA
action on his requests. In McManus' words, the CIA was "re-
quired to assist Lansdale in these "unrealistic", "half-baked,"
and "half-ass" schemes. McManus added that with every new
dawn a Lansdale courrier bearing yet another "half-baked
scheme" would arrive at Task Force W's door.
McManus succinctly painted a picture of the Agency's
and more specifically, McCone's, Helms', Harvey's and McManus'
resentment of Lansdale. Lansdale with the CIA "as his
troops and horses" was ready to do battle, albeit indi-
rectly, with the Castro regime.
Although the frenzy of activity
McManus stressed that "Lansdale's projects simply gave
the impression of movement.
gave a whirlwind impression, it was without substance. McManus
noted some higher ups regarded Lansdale as a mystic, viz, "they
must have believed that despite Lansdale's insane ideas, he had
some sort of power to accomplish results or they wouldn't
have kept him."
Neither Helms nor McManus had daily contact with Lansdale.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 11
5
2
As mentioned above, Lansdale often communicated directly with
Harvey. (Who also held Lansdale in contempt). McManus added
that the Task Force was a new and unusual concept, and not
"really part of the Agency organization."
シ
NW 50955 DocId:32423607 Page 12
McManus on the Special Group (augmented):
McManus was surprisngly uninformed as to the Special
Group (augmented) and the established approval structure we
have heard so much about. He felt that the "33 tasks" were
so broad that virtually any and all sabotage/propaganda
activities envisioned by the task force would ha ve been
permissible. In pressing McManus as to authorizational
scope, he again reiterated that assassinations were not within
the perimeters of permissible activities.
McManus admitted that as a result of Mongoose, Castro's
death might result from a Cuban uprising. However, McManus
sees clear moral and political distinctions between this
indirect death and U. S.-sponsored assassination attempts.
One practical distinction mentioned was that"targeting Castro
was tantamount to placing our leaders in a shooting gallery."
McManus is aware of the make-up of the Special Group
and Lansdale's focal role. However, he claims to have had
virtually no contact with the non-CIA members (Querre: how
did McManus formulate the opinions set forth in his November
5, 1962, memorandum).
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 13
تو
McManus on his November 5, 1962 Memorandum
In early November Helms asked McManus what he thought
about the past year's Cuban operations. McManus replied that
he would rather put it in writing.
memorandum is his "thinkpiece." Helms never discussed the
The November 5, 1962
memorandum with McManus. However, McManus deduces
the handwritten notation in the margin which reflects that the
from
document was removed from the files of McCone's executive assis-
tant that Helms reviewed the memorandum and forwarded it to
McCone.
McManus ducked many of our specific questions relating
to the memorandum. He had said earlier in the interview, however,
that the Attorney General "viewed the project in a political
light i.e., as the means to limit Castro's advances in
Latin America. Moreover, McManus did not sufficiently answer
our questions as to which of the other players shared his ex-
pressed views.
I would think that we will want to review this memorandum
with McManus tomorrow.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 14
McManus on not being informed of assassination attempts
while Admiral Rayburn's executive assistant:
As noted previously, McManus disclaims any knowledge
whatever of assassination plans or attempts. He rejects
the notion of "plausible deniability" at the operational
level; i.e., where the operatives would not inform the
SCI or DDP. In adamantly rejecting the existence of any
such unwritten law in the intelligence community, he
stressed that DCI must be fully informed as to all ongoing
Agency operations. Indeed, McManus told us that McCone,
Rayburn, and Helms were all "inquisitive" men.
McManus believes that McCone would have been "morally
outraged" if informed of assassination attempts.
However,
the "accuracy" of McManus' statement may be questioned as
he also stated that "Helms would have been opposed to assa-
ssinations." When I explained that Helms was aware of such
attempts, he could not provide a satisfactory response.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423607 Page 15