176-10036-10002
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER : 176-10036-10002
RECORD SERIES: National Security Files
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR :
FROM :
TO :
TITLE: New Policy on the Congo
DATE: 12/13/1962
PAGES: 9
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 9/10/2000
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: Congo Cables; restriction information innacurate/missing; box 1
SECRET
CNL-01-028-2-2-8-
NCK-03-929, 7/04
Copy
of 25 copies, Series A.
December 13, 1962
MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT
SUBJECT: New Policy on the Congo
THIS IMPASSE
We are seeking to prevent an increase in Communist influence
in the Congo, to reintegrate the Katanga, and to strengthen and maintain
a moderate government in Leopoldville that can in fact run the
country. Without reinvigoration, our present policy cannot achieve
these ends.
Tshombe is getting stronger and continues to maneuver for an
independent Katanga.
There is an apparent paralysis in Leopoldville and Adoula is
unable, with a hostile Parliament around his neck, to take steps
necessary for reconciliation and reintegration.
A Communist bloc presence in Leopoldville is now a distinct
possibility. But how much initiative the Soviets will take will be
directly related to their assessment of our will to act in Central
Africa. Their disadvantages, in trying to operate in Central Africa
are so great that they will not move unless it appears we are dis-
engaging.
The United Nations, with limited financial resources and probably
early withdrawals of Indian troops, cannot remain in the Congo much
longer as an effective force.
Because United States and UN policy/for all practical purposes
have been indistinguishable, the Organization's failure in the Congo
would be a major failure of this Administration's policy and would
seriously undermine the peacekeeping role of the United Nations.
The Need for a New Policy
The basic assumption of our present Congo policy is that
we could get Katanga reintegrated into the Congo and an effective
moderate government established and functioning in Leopoldville,
by persuasion and diplomacy backed up by threats of economic action.
This assumption has turned out to be wrong. It is wrong because
Tshombe and his supporters are clearly not going to reintegrate unless
they have to and nothing we have done convinces Tshombe that, in the
last analysis, he will be forced to it.
It is also wrong because we are not building an effective Central
Government in Leopoldville. A largely irresponsible Parliament and
a flabby administration are not good enough as a political framework;
Adoula is the best leader on the horizon, but we should be helping
to develop other political leadership.
The Situation this Week
After much international conversation, Foreign Minister Spaak
has sent a private emissary to Tshombe to get him to accept a change
in the method by which UN makes its payments. The decision to make
the payments to the Central Government instead of to Tshombe should
have been taken without trying to "clear it" with Tshombe, but
Spaak elected to consult Tshombe first. We do not yet know on what
terms Tshombe will accept Spaak's proposal. We do know from
experience that if it requires any action on his part to carry out
the detail, that action will not be taken.
Shutting off the UN payments to Tshombe is still the best
single thing that can be done to put pressure on Tshombe and lead
him to make Katanga in fact a part of the Congo. But UN is naturally
reluctant to get out in front of governments, and the Belgians are
naturally reluctant to seem more resolute in this matter than the
United States.
There has also been much talk about halting the purchase of
Katangan copper and cobalt. Adoula has now, without adequate
consultation, proposed to eleven countries that they stop buying
Katangan copper and cobalt. Secretary General U Thant was about
to do the same, but we prevailed on him to delay his action until
next week, to give the Spaak efforts on the payments scheme time
to work.
We do not believe that economic sanctions would be very
effective. Moreover, they would require several months to make
them effective, and new legislation in some countries, including
Belgium.
There is, therefore, no immediate prospect that measures now
in train under the "U Thant Plan" will do very much either to re-
integrate the Katanga or to build in Leopoldville a government
that can govern.
Alternative Lines of Action
We have carefully considered and rejected, for the time being
at least, the following alternatives:
(a) Disengagement by the United States. The prohibitive
cost would be a serious decline of US influence in Leopoldville,
an expanding Soviet bloc position in the Congo and the heart of
Africa, and probably irreparable damage to the UN as a
peacekeeper;
(b) Turning the matter over to the Africans. The
Africans cannot handle it, and this would open the Congo
to eventual Communist takeover;
(c) Buying Leopoldville's acquiescence to Tshombe's
secession. Leopoldville cannot be bought so long as it has the
alternative of Soviet aid; and
(d) Backing Tshombe as the unifier of the Congo. We see
no prospect that Tshombe could win enough support throughout
the Congo to make this a realistic possibility.
The Central Problems U.S. Policy and U.S. Will.
What is wrong with the picture is the absence of a U.S.
decision as to what we would do, in the final analysis, to prevent
chaos, large-scale massacres, and/or a major Soviet presence called
in by radical successors to Adoula. If we continue to pursue
present policies, they will result in hardening the Tshombe secession,
further weakening the position of Adoula (because of his inability to
solve the Katanga problem, the one big modern-style political issue
in Congo politics). If we go down this road, we may eventually have to
use United States, and perhaps other western forces to clean up
a very messy state of affairs.
If we are clear now that in the ultimate case we would use our
own power in Central Africa, then anything short of that that will
prevent a breakdown in the Congo is preferable to waiting too long
and then having to go in with too much.
We therefore recommend that the United States Government take
it as a major objective to develop a modern and moderate Central
Government in the Congo, to get Katanga reintegrated into the
Congo and to prevent a Soviet presence in the Congo. We recommend
immediate steps both to move rapidly toward these objectives and
to demonstrate that we have in fact taken this decision and are
prepared to back it with the full weight of United States power.
A Democracy cannot bluff unless it means it. If we mean it,
and if it is clear to all concerned that we mean it, we can use the
possibility of our fuller intervention later to accomplish our
purposes with less intervention now.
Recommended Approach
We recommend three kinds of steps to move ahead, on the
assumption that we really mean it:
(a) The UN forces in the Congo should be built up
to the point where it would clearly be ridiculous for
Tshombe's Katangan forces to challenge them.
(b) Convince Adoula to prorogue the Parliament,
to govern with a backing of a pro-western group headed by
Mobutu, and to establish more effective administration with
UN, U.S. and Belgian assistance.
(c) Continue to pursue vigorously the most feasible
elements of the Thant Plan, notably the division of revenues
(without further consultation with Tshombe, if necessary),
the Central Government's amnesty, the military standstill
in North Katanga, and an attempt to force an agreed
division of powers and the beginnings of military integration
between the Central Government and the Katanga.
In these circumstances, we recommend three major steps:
1. Military Steps to be Taken.
At the present time, our assessment is that, with the new
Indonesian battalion (one of them supposedly a paratrooper battalion)
and the relatively good security situation in the rest of the country,
the UN has enough ground forces to handle any challenge from
Katangan gendarmerie if it is not challenged from the air.
The problem is, therefore, to make sure that no present
or conceivable Katanga air capability has a chance to operate against
the UN forces. This means following through on all of the present
arrangements to beef up the UN air forces in the area with Swedish,
Italian, Iranian, and Ethiopian equipment and personnel. Beyond this,
it means placing in the Congo to back up the UN forces, an American
fighter unit. The assessment of all military forces in the
Congo is attached at TAB A. An analysis supporting the proposal for
a United States Air Force unit is at TAB B.
It would be a departure from the original Hammarskjold
policy for the United Nations to accept an American unit as a part
of the regular UNOC Force. Moreover, we would want to maintain
command of our own Air Force units in the area. If the Secretary
General is willing, it would probably be possible to develop a
request from the Adoula Government, endorsed by the UN, for the
placement in Leopoldville of an American Air Force unit with the
mission of (a) protecting our transport planes which are operating
in the interior of the Congo on behalf of the UN; (b) backing up
the UN Forces; and (c) training and developing an adequate national
air force for the Central Government of the Congo.
Our willingness to do this would be very well received by
a great majority of the UN members, and especially by members of the
Congo Advisory Committee. To the Secretary General, it would symbolize
and demonstrate in a practical way our earnest resolve to see this
thing through and avoid a major failure by the UN in its largest
peacekeeping attempt.
Needless to say, the presence of U.S. forces or even the
clear knowledge that U.S. forces were available for this purpose
would be a significant pressure on Tshombe and his associates. Tshombe
could interpret this decision in no other way than as proof that
any resistance on his part to the UN, or any attempt to destroy
European facilities in Katanga, would be met by a devastating
counter blow.
We are suggesting a build-up of U.S. military forces under
a UN umbrella, for the purpose of avoiding the use of force to re-
integrate the Katanga. The idea is not that the United States or
the U.S. would take a military initiative to destroy Tshombe's
government. But the UN, with U.S. backing, would be placed in a
position where the alternative of military resistance was no longer
open to Tshombe, and political negotiation leading toward
reconciliation and reintegration, would be the only rational
choice left to him.
Strengthening the Central Government.
The steps required to strengthen the Central Government
are set forth in TAB C.
In general, while Adoula is not an ideal choice, we believe
he is the best individual available to hold the reins of government
in Leopoldville and, even with Parliament dismissed, he would enjoy
the virtue of having taken office legitimately. The question
of maintaining a "coup" group in power would involve the CIA to
a certain extent. For obvious reasons, we would prefer to keep
the entire operation as overt as possible, and the fact that Kasavuba
can legally prorogue Parliament for thirty days facilitates this.
In this connection, we would expect Adoula to establish a more
effective executive branch. While we have considered giving
additional assistance to the UN in establishing its own air capability,
this requirement would, for the time being, be redundant in view
of the strengthening of the UN air force. This, too, would
reduce the need for us to expand our covert operations with the
constant risk of exposure.
Reconciliation and Reintegration.
The detailed agenda of steps required is available - indeed,
is all too familiar. But in a new atmosphere produced by a new
demonstration that we mean it, some of the steps required could be
taken immediately.
Adoula could order the standstill with minimum difficulty
if assured of this more forthcoming US/UN support. However,
although the UN is now negotiating the subject with Tshombe,
when it is faced with US determination to end secession, this might
stimulate them to turn over immediately their taxes and foreign
exchange to the Monetary Council with or without Tshombe's
agreement. Working out the agreed division of power between the
Central Government and the Katanga and arrangements for military
integration would be a more complex task. We think this could
best be achieved by having U Thant personally fly to the Congo and
negotiate a final settlement with Adoula and Tshombe on these questions.
Both sides would be given to understand that we would tolerate
no nonsense in firming up specific arrangements based upon
the negotiations that have already been held.
10:UMP:Sisco/Buffum
10:HCleveland:mtb