176-10036-10074
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER : 176-10036-10074
RECORD SERIES: National Security Files
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR :
FROM: Johnson
TO: Rostow
TITLE: Meeting of Vietnam Task Force July 7, 1961
DATE: 7/14/1961
PAGES : 4
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 9/10/2000.
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: National Security Files, Box 193: Vietnam General 7/14/1961-
7/21/1961. Box 1
C. Sanitized SECRET
NLK-75-26
July 14, 1961 RAL 1/02
MEMORANDUM FOR MR. ROSTOW
SUBJECT: Meetings of the Viet Nam Task Force on Monday, July 7, 1961
and Thursday, July 13, 1961
Meeting on Monday, July 7
The principal item was a preliminary oral report by Mr. Paul Geren,
the State member of the Special Financial Group. He said that the principal
gain from the SFG's visit was a confrontation of seven American economic
officials with seven Vietnamese. Several of the Vietnamese were competent
economists but the group was not representative of the inner circle of the
government. It was headed by the dean of the law school. The members of
the Vietnamese group group was not in the same sort of communication with their
superic periors that the Americans were with theirs. They were not, for example
the
familiar with the texts of the letters that have been exchanged between t
President and Diem.
were the
The principal pri commitments made by the Vietnamese we
following:
taxe es
effective collection of
To increase the t e the tax take through more effe
b. To attempt to sell government bonds. The Vietnamese were
very skeptical cal of the feasibility of such gover ernment bond sale. They
took the view that the attempt.c att could ld do nó harm hả and that after some
effort to sell bonds to Is to the people, they ey would be sold to the Central
Bank
E
To collect at least 750 million additional piasters a year
through raising the effective ive exchange ex rate from 35 tỏ to 60 tổ to the dollar.
This would be accomplished accomplished by leaving the official exchange rate as it is
but by imposing special taxes which would have the effect of increasing.
the Deffective rate.
There re was some discussion of the exchange rate question. n. In the course
of this discussion it was pointed out that a rate of 60 represented in fact only
a 6 plaster inc increase seov over the existing rate on aid imports. It was also noted
that the proposed osed sys system will multiply ly the compl omplexities of the exnhange rate
system rather than reducing them and will thus offer increased opportunities
SECRET
for graft. Mr. Geren pointed out, as an example of Diem's impact on the
negotiations, the fact that an initial one billion piaster estimate by the
Vietnamese had been reduced to 750 million after a talk between. Diem and
the head of the GVN delegation. Mr. Geren believed that the lengthy dis-
cussions with the Vietnamese on this subject helped to convince them that,
what the U. S. can contribute is isa a transfer of goods and services and th
the piaster problem is their problem.
that
Diem is convinced that exchange reform in Laos was responsible
for its downfall. He argues that establishment of a unitary rate eliminated
the possibility of export to Thailand of goods supplied under the aid program
for Laos. This in turn made it impossible for the Lao Government to pay
its soldiers, which in turn led to the Kong Le revolt. (This is a most curious,
argument and also a most curious rious use us of U. S. aid supplies in Laos. As you
may have noted from incoming telegrams, some effort is being made to de
velop the counter-argument. )
The Vietnamese have temporarily embargoed the export of rice on
he grounds that they don't want a speculative movement in rice prices which
might ght result from the capability of the the Viet Viet Cong to reduce rice supplies to
Saigon. 1. When the SFG suggested that that this was a problem on which we
might be able to to give some help t elp through our surplus agricultural commodity
program, the Vietnamese indicated that they could not, for reasons of face,
accept U. S. agricultural products.
2
The Vietnamese indicated that they wish next year a $190 million com
mercial import program gram from the U. S. This they ju justify al almost wholly on
balance of payments. sgrounds. The Special Financial Group did not, of course,
agree to such a program. (Our commercial import program last year was
something less than $100 million.)
The Vietnamese represented their effort, as summarized briefly above
as the most that they would be able to do and they look to us to pick up the
est
In the course of discussion of other matters, the JCS representative
indicated that further investigation had revealed that there is is existing
authority to permit the. U. S. military in Viet Nam to participate, as combat
observers, in military operations down to the company level. However the
Vietnamese directive to GVN commanders states that such participation, as
well as consultation on the planning of ning of operations will take pl place "if necessary",
Implementation of this directive is not as complete as the U. S. would Id like.
Chief MAAG is attempting attempting to remedy the situation.
2
SECRET
Meeting on Thursday, July 13
In the intelligence briefing additional information was given on the
recent three-service military sweep in the south. It involved 4,000 men on
the Vietnamese side and resulted in 20 Viet Cong killed, 7 wounded, and 37
captured. This does not seem a very large result for such a military opera-
tion. Over-all (GVN-supplied) casualty figures for May and June were a's.
follows:
Viet Cong
GVN
May June
May June
Killed
Wounded
824 757
240 187
274
Captured
Total
67
470
15.8
163
891 1,227
439634
Reference was made to the fact that the Soviet Ambassador is said to
have virtually demanded that the Thais accept Soviet aid. Sarit, according
to a Reuters dispatch, has indicated that Thailand would accept Soviet aid
provided there were no strings attached.
?
The State briefer summarized a TDCS (attached) containing much in-
teresting information on alleged North Vietnamese activities bearing on
South Viet Nam. The most striking item included was the allegation that
North Viet Nam intends to infiltrate no less than 30,000 Viet Cong'i into
South Viet Nam during the month of July. The State briefer was doubtful of
the validity of this report and pointed out that, of course, if such an an infiltra-
tion occurred it would be readily detectable and an obvious case of DRV
aggression..
We have indications that the Cao Dai has taken the initiative tive to offer
its support to to the GVN. While no conditions were mentioned, it is assumed
that, as in the past, the Cao Dai would impose conditions on its cooperation
in the form of a request to recover some of its former status.
جہ
Another report in indicated that agrarian reform had come to to a virtual
standstill in Viet Nam because of the insurgenc insurgency. It was INR's a evaluation;
however, that while the program had sl slowed down, there continued to be-some be
progress. (This is a matter that I have flagged to Cottrell and suggested
that, if he did not already have clear information on it, he might check into it.)
Includes 41 deserters not included in breakdown.
SECRET
Most of the meeting was given over to discussion of Viet Nam with a
press officers group which included Roger Tubby and Pierre Salinger.
Cottrell did almost all of the talking and soon got on the subject of the effect
of the situation in Laos on the situation in Viet Nam and what we might do
about it. In this connection there was passed out a contingency plan for an
information program to support a possible change in U. S. policy in Laos-
Viet Nam. A copy is attached. att As you will note, the the emphasis in this plan
is on procedure rather than upon substance. No opportunity was given to
comment on the plan at the meeting. I today suggested to Cottrell that the
substantive aspects be somewhat beefed up and also that the plan emphasize
the control of the operation in South Viet Nam by the DRV. The plan (par. 5)
now talks about DRV intervention solely in terms of exporting aggressors
across international frontiers.
:
Although I had no opportunity to make the point while the press
people were present, I subsequently suggested to the Task Force that one of
the most difficult public relations problems we have to deal with is the common
ewspaper reporters' s' vi view that without political pol reform, the GVN cannot
succeed in its fight against the Viet Cong. While there is much truth in this
argument, I suggested that perhaps the writers writers did not adequately distinguish
between "democracy in Saigon" and political and administrative reforms
designed to increase the effectiveness of the government's operations and
improve its relationship to the countryside. It seemed to me that the la
improve its relationship to t
latter
types of of reform were much more important and more feasible than the former.
I suggested that it might be desirable to get this point across to newsmen.
2
Robert. H. Johnson
SECRET

