176-10036-10068
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY: NARA
RECORD NUMBER : 176-10036-10068
RECORD SERIES: National Security Files
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM :
TO :
TITLE: Exchange of Intelligence Among Counties
DATE :
PAGES : 4
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE :
CLASSIFICATION :
RESTRICTIONS :
CURRENT STATUS :
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 9/10/2000
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: National Security Files, Box 59: Cuba Subjects, Cuban Subversion,
3/1/1963-3/14/1963. Box 1
W 49061 DOGTA.3959999n
SANITIZED INCK 01. U54.6.1.1
SECRET
CUBA
EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE AMONG OAS COUNTRIES ON COMMUNIST
SUDVERSIVE ACTIVITIES IN THE HEMISFREE
Fature and Scope of the Problem
A. While there is some information available in certain
countries, the illegal sovement and clandestino activities of
Communists in Latin America, particularly those who have been
trained in Cube, are not adequately covered by existing intelli-
gence sources.
B. The level of competence of most latin American intelli-
gence services, whether military or civilian, is tos. Efforts
are being made by CIA, AID and the 6.8. military services to
inprove this situation, but the progress has been slow in most
cases and nonexistent in others. It has been found that the
existing government in some countries, of which Guatemala is a
good example, have no desire to build a competent career security
service. There is apparently a fear that the existence of a
competent service would interfere with future political activities
of the members of the existing government in the event that they
should find themselves on the outside looking in. There is no
unity of viospoint asong the various existing intelligence
cervices, and many of them have a tendency to yield to the
temptation to label as "subveroives" those of their own nationals.
resident in neighboring countries who are opposed to the present
goverment. Nevertheless, existing services of the Latin
SEGRET
GROUP 1
Excluded frein automatic
dowagrading and
declassificatioa
76
SECRET
American countries can produce much useful intelligence on this
subject with an increased effort.
C. Intelligence available to United States agencies on
this subject is generally derived either from truly covert
operations or has been obtained through liaison with another
intelligence or security service. In either case, this inhibita
the ability of U.8. agencies to pass the information to agencies
of a third country. There is, however, a substantial acount of
intelligence available to D.8. agencies fren either overt or
nonsensitive sources which could be passed to other countries.
D. The only secure and rapid communications facilition in
Latin America are those of the U.S. Covernment and while these
are being improved, the presently authorized augmentation of
facilities has not yet been completed.
E. CIA has working liaison arrangements in every country
in Latin America where it has been found fruitful to establish
and maintain such arrangements. 5.8. military representatives
have contacts with their counterparts.
F. U.8. experience in the matter of intelligenco exchange
in other areas has led to the conclusion that in almost all
instances, bilateral arrangements are more fruitful than such
multilateral arrangemente co have been established within the
framework of HATO, CENTO, and SEATO. Novertheless, experience
has shown that such multilateral arrangemento can be useful,
particularly in creating an avarences of the need for the
enchange of intelligence. In the case of the CAB, active
SECRET
76
SECRET
participation by the United States in order to provide guidance
would appear to be highly desirable.
II. RECGAmended Courses of Action
Certain Courses of Action already recommended by this Com-
aittee and approved by higher authority in connection with the
control of travel to Cuba have a direct bearing upon the matter
of intelligence exchange. These include (1) the undertaking of
an immediate study of the feasibility and desirability of
establishing intelligence centers at Caribbean Command and
Caribbean Sea Frontier; (2) an intensification of our action in
making available to each country selected intelligence concerning
the extent, nature and insidious toplications of Cuban subversive
activities, as consistent with the requirementtte protect our
own intelligence system, (3) the utilisation of appropriate bodies
of the dis for maltilateral exchange of information.
Additional Courses of Action recommended are:
A. Intensify and increase existing AID, CIA and
Military programs for the training and equipping of Latin
American Internal security and intelligence services. Establish
such assistance programs in additional countries whore it is
found to be desirable from our point of view and acceptable to
the country concerned.
B. Increase and refine the existing flow of counter-
intelligence information from CIA and other elemente of Azerican
Embassies in Latin America to Caribbean Command as well as to
CIA headquarters, from both of which pointe further appropriate
SECRET
76
SECRET
dissemination can be made.
C. Encourage Latin American countries to engage in
bilateral exchange of intelligence on Communist activities.
D. Undertake appropriate actions in the 0.4.8. to
bring about the creation, with U.S. participation, of a standing
committee of senior representatives of intelligence and security
services with a view to their establishing and guiding the
activities of an appropriate mechanism for the miltilateral
exchange of intelligence and counterintelligence information
regarding Communist subversive activities.
E. Continue and intensify current efforts to improve
0.8. communications facilities throughout Latin America.
F. Increase the dissemination to Latin American
goveramente, by all 0.8. agencies concerned, of unclassified
studies, reports and other information concerning Communist
subverston
SECRET
76