178-10004-10280
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
MATHENY
178-10004-10280
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Agency Information
Date:
8/27/201
AGENCY:
RECORD NUMBER:
RECORD SERIES:
SSC SERIES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
REPORT RE JFK ASSASSINATION (1)
Document Information
BRECKINRIDGE, SCOTT D.
MILLER, WILLIAM G.
ORIGINATOR:
CIA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
06/10/1976
PAGES:
14
SUBJECTS:
WARREN COMMISSION, INFORMATION WITHHELD FROM
FITZGERALD, DESMOND
OSWALD, LEE, TRIP TO MEXICO
LOPEZ, GILBERT
KENNEDY, ROBERT
AMLASH
ANTI-CASTRO ACTIVITIES
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
CHURCH COMMITTEE
CIA
CLANDESTINE OPERATIONS
CUBAN COORDINATING COMMITTEE
CUBAN EXILES
CUBELA, ROLANDO
FAIR PLAY FOR CUBA COMMITTEE
WARREN COMMISSION
LETTER
Unclassified
Consulted
Redact
09/01/1995
Includes two attachments: AMLASH Operation, and Item Comments on Draft Report of SSC
Subcommittee.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738
16
Page 1
178-10004-10280
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20505
10 June 1976
Series A Copy 1 c
→J. Matheny
I have
acopy
Mr. William G. Miller
Staff Director
Select Committee to Study Governmental
Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities
Room G-308
Dirksen Senate Office Building
Washington, D. C. 20515
Dear Bill:
Forwarded herewith are comments on the draft report of
the Senate Select Committee's subcommittee on the question of
support by the intelligence agencies for the Warren Commission
inquiry. These comments have been prepared under a tight
deadline, which has limited the ability to research all the questions
raised in the draft report.
:
The attachments to this letter are in two sections. The first
is a summary of considerations relating to the relationship between
CIA and AMLASH/1 prior to the assassination of President Kennedy
on 22 November 1963. The point is that the record of what was said
to AMLASH/1, and specific reporting of what he understood, makes
it clear that there were no grounds for him to believe, and he did
not believe, that he had CIA support for an assassination plot against
Castro in the period preceding President Kennedy's death. The
second attachment is an item-by-item series of comments, ranging
from minor editorial notations and comments, to factual corrections
and security points.
As there is a basic difference between the interpretation of
facts in the draft report, and the facts as we know them, it would be
appreciated if there could be an opportunity to address the question
with the members of the Subcommittee. It is my opinion that it would
be a disservice to the public to issue the report as now written.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
Attachments:
As stated
;
Sincerely,
S, D. Breckinridge
Deputy Inspector General
:
REVOLUTION
AMER
RICAN
1776-1976
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738 Page 2
TOP SECRET
Classified by Signer
BICENTENNIAL
ΧΑΚΟΣΧΟXXX
Series A copy 1 of
:
AMLASH Operation
The objective of the AMLASH operation throughout its
existence was the formation of a nucleus within Cuba to organize
an internal coup to replace the Castro regime. AMLASH/1 held
a position high in the Cuban government. He was disillusioned
with the Castro regime and was considered as a possible political
action asset. The Agency had a series of meetings with him
during the 1961-62 period, the last of which was in August 1962
prior to his departure for Havana. He was never a fully recruited.
agent.
In September 1963 AMLASH/1 was met in Brazil, the first
time since the August 1962 meetings. During the September 1963
meeting with AMLASH/1, he said that there were two ways to
effect a coup; through an outside invasion (which he recognized
was out of the question at that time) or through an "inside job"
(i.e.internal coup via military overthrow). He indicated that
he was waiting for a plan of action from the United States
Government. By this he meant high-level assurances of support
for a successful coup. The same cable which reported the results
of the meeting also indicated that AMLASH/1 "will always be a
control problem."
:
AMLASH/1 then went to Paris, France, where he was met
again. Meetings with AMLASH/1 in October 1963 consisted of
exploration as to what he might do, and requests by him for
U.S. support. In response to his seeking high-level assurances
of U.S. support, Desmond FitzGerald met with him on
29 October 1963. The plan for that meeting is described in
writing in the file as follows:
"FitzGerald will represent self as personal
representative of Robert F. Kennedy who
traveled Paris for specific purpose meeting
(AMLASH/1) and giving him assurances of
full U.S. support if there is change of the.
present government in Cuba," (Emphasis. added).
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
TOP SECRET
Classified by Signer
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738 Page 3
A memorandum for the record of that meeting, dated
13 November 1963, contained the following summary:
"FitzGerald informed (AMLASH/1 that the
United States is prepared to render all
necessary assistance to any anti-communist
Cuban group which succeeds in neutralizing
the present Cuban leadership and assumes
sufficient control to invite the United States
to render the assistance it is prepared to
give. It was emphasized that the above
support will be forthcoming only after a
real coup has been effected and the group
involved is in a position to request U.S.
(probably under OAS auspices) recognition
and support. It was made clear that the U.S.
was not prepared to commit itself to support-
ing an isolated uprising, as such an uprising
can be extinguished in a matter of hours if
the present government is still in control in
Havana. As for the post-coup period, the
U.S. does not desire that the political clock be
turned back but will support the necessary economic
and political reforms which will benefit the mass of
the Cuban people." (Emphasis added).
In 1967 the Inspector General of CIA conducted an investi-
gation of the AMLASH operation, and interviewed Mr. FitzGerald
and his exécutive officer (who had been kept thoroughly familiar
with developments). FitzGerald recalled that AMLASH/1 spoke of
the need for an assassination weapon, particularly a high powered
rifle with telescopic sights or some other weapon which could
be used to kill Castro from a distance. FitzGerald rebuffed
this request and instructed the case officer who served as an
interpreter to tell AMLASH/1 that the U.S. simply did not do
such things. FitzGerald's executive officer, though not pre-
sent, had the same recollection. Mr. FitzGerald assured
AMLASH/1 of full U.S. support "if there is a change of the
present leadership.".
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738 Page 4
-2-
TOP SECRET
The 13 November memorandum also stated that:
"Nothing of an operational nature was discussed
at the FitzGerald meeting. After the meeting
(AMLASH/1) stated that he was satisfied with
the policy discussion but now desired to know
what technical support we could provide him."
On 14 November 1963 a Cuban exile in New York (the source
of the original introduction to AMLASH/1) stated to a CIA case
officer that AMLASH/1, while: "...satisfied...as far as policy
was concerned, ... was not at all happy with the fact that he
still was not given the technical assistance for the operational
plan as he saw it... He could not understand why he was denied
certain small pieces of equipment which permitted a final
solution to the problem, while, on the other hand, the U.S.
Government gave much equipment and money to exile groups for
their ineffective excusions..." The report of that meeting.
also stated: "... if he does not get advice and material from a
U.S. Government technician, he will probably become fed-up
again and we will lose whatever progress we have made to date. "
On 19 November 1963 a CIA memorandum records FitzGerald's
approval of a cache for AMLASH/1 inside Cuba, with high-powered
rifles and scopes. During the period following 19 November.
and prior to a meeting in Paris on 22 November, a ballpoint pen
was rigged as a hypodermic syringe with which AMLASH/1 could
administer a poison. The case officer arrived in Paris on
22 November 1963 and met with AMLASH/1 on that date. AMLASH/1
was shown the ballpoint pen device but did not accept it. He also
was told of the arms cache he would be provided.
The record is quite clear that AMLASH/1 had no grounds,
prior to 22 November 1963, to believe that he had any support
from the United States for operations involving the assassin-
ation of Fidel Castro. In fact, he had no advance support for
a coup, however he might attempt it. This is emphasized by
his recorded complaints on the subject, clearly reflecting his
understanding that such was the case. His complaint on 14
November 1963, as reported through an intermediary, may have
led to the decision on 19 November 1963 to provide him with
:
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
-3-
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738 Page 5
token support that he could interpret as the support he had
been requesting unsuccessfully. That decision was taken
19 November 1963 inside CIA Headquarters by FitzGerald and
formalized by a memorandum written the same date.
Prior to 22 November 1963 CIA had refused to give
AMLASH/1 any support prior to a successful coup in Cuba.
That he recognized that this specifically included a refusal to
participate in the assassination of Castro is reflected in the
description of a July 1964 report by the FBI, quoted in the SSC
Subcommittee draft, in which AMLASH/1 stated that Robert F.
Kennedy had refused support for the assassination of Castro.
As the 29 October meeting with FitzGerald is the one at which
he understood he was meeting with a representative of Robert F.
Kennedy, it confirms the description in the 1967 IG Report.
Whatever the relationship with AMLASH/1 after 22 November,
the evidence is unequivocal that AMLASH/1 had no grounds prior
to that for believing that he had CLA support for his vaguely defined
course of action. He knew nothing that, had it leaked, would have
served to motivate a Cuban retaliatory strike against President
Kennedy.
Finally, it is significant that the transcripts of AMLASH/1's
1966 trial contain no reference to his activities prior to 1964; i. e.,
before President Kennedy's assassination. The transcripts suggest
that, to the Cubans' knowledge, AMLASH/1 was not in touch with CIA
before November 1964. Nor did the book which Castro provided to
Senator McGovern in 1975, which purported to be an inventory of all
known plots against Castro's life, contain any allegation of AMLASH/I
anti-Castro activity prior to late 1964. The book mentions travel by
AMLASH/1 to Madrid "where he was recruited by CIA agents." This
travel occurred in November 1964. The above two instances strongly
suggest that Castro was not aware that AMLASH/1 had any contact
with CLA prior to November 1964; i.e., one year after President.
Kennedy's death.
The reported AMLASH/1 notoriety in the Miami Cuban exile
community did not occur prior to President Kennedy's death. This
developed after the 1966 trial and to some degree after AMLASH/1
met with Cuban exile leaders in Madrid in late 1964 and early 1965.
This was after AMLASH/1 was informed in 1964 that the U.S.
Government had severed its relationship with him.
The most recent information available indicates that AMLASH/P
is still in jail, where he is serving a thirty year sentence.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId: 32105738 Page 6
-4-
TOP SECRET
Item Comments on Draft Report of SSC Subcommittee
Page 2.
Line II. The word "agents" may describe FBI
employees, but it is not a term ordinarily applied
to CIA staff employees.
:
:
Page 7.
Page 8.
Page 9.
Photocopy
from
2nd complete paragraph, 2d line. The phrase
"backed by CIA, "in describing the Bay of Pigs.
operation, is imprecise. CIA was the government
instrument for conducting the operation, but there
was considerable other participation in what was
an operation "backed" by the U.S. government.
The statement that the FBI knew about these plots
by at least May 1962 needs some elaboration.
These plots (assassination) did not involve AMLASH/1
at that time, and what the FBI knew may have been
about aspects of contacts, the nature of which it did
not know. (Need this be reconciled with the state-
ment at page 12 giving the date of FBI's learning
whatever it learned in July 1964?)
2nd and 3d paragraphs. It is noted that operational
activity in June 1963--the date given--was that there was
inoactivity with the criminal Syndicate (this having
been ended several months earlier), and there had
been no contact with AMLASH/1 since August 1962.
Statements by Castro about "terrorists" had to apply
to other activities.
Paragraph at bottom of page (continuing over to
page 9). References by Castro (12 September 1963)
to "covert activities" undoubtedly referred to not-
so-covert activity of MONGOOSE.
Bottom of page, speaking of 29 October 1963 meeting
between AMLASH/1 and Fitzgerald, the draft report |
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 7
TOP SECRET
Classified hor Cinunu
says ".
within weeks of this meeting CIA escalated
the level of its covert operations, telling AMLASH
the United States supported his plan. "
This misrepresents what AMLASH/1 was told
at the 20 October 1963 meeting, which was that
he would receive no support unless he was
successful in a coup of his own. There is no
planning relationship between the inconclusive
status of the understanding with AMLASH/1 and
what was going on under MONGOOSE.
Page 10.
"Oswald contacted a known KGB agent" with the Soviet
Embassy in Mexico. While it is known that Oswald
contacted the Vice Consul at the Soviet Embassy in
Mexico City, it is believed that it was for the purpose
of obtaining a visa for the Soviet Union. The fact that
the Vice Consul happened to be a KGB officer complicates
the matter but there is no evidence that Oswald knew
this Soviet was KGB. Therefore, recommend this
sentence be modified accordingly.
Page 12.
Page 14.
Page 15.
"Hoover and other senior officials first learned of
plots to assassinate Castro in July 1964," Did they?
:
"Moreover, there is evidence that CIA's investigators
made requests for files which should have given
knowledge of the AMLASH operation, but for some
reason they did not acquire that knowledge."
A quick review of CI Staff files, in the time
available for this review, disclose no requests
that, of themselves, would produce information
on the AMLASH operation.
The draft report raises the question of what was
furnished investigators, which raises the question of
what was requested, by whom? (See comment on item
on page 14).
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
-2-
TOP SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 8
Of course, the reference to especial relevance
of the AMLASH operation in this context is
questioned.
Page 21.
Draft report states that President Kennedy did "admit
that the Bay of Pigs invasion was in fact an operation
sponsored by the CIA, " Our impression was that he
accepted this responsibility as his, for a government
program. How and in what forum was the stated
admission?
Page 27.
(numbered 29)
Page 29.
Speaking of renewal of contact with AMLASH/1 the
*
*
draft says ".
the exact purpose the CIA had for
renewing contact is not known, but there is no evidence
that CIA intended at this time to use AMLASH in an
assassination operation.
When AMLASH came out of Cuba in September
1963, it was the first chance since August 1962
to see him. Recontact needed no mysterious
"exact purpose." It is correct to state that
there was no evidence of intent to use him as an
assassination operation; rather, the circum-
stances that followed suggest just the opposite.
13
:
Footnote: The case officer did not say, as stated
in the draft, that the basis for meeting with AMLASH
was the belief of AMLASH that the first step of any
coup was assassination. While AMLASH's views were
known, as shown by the evidence his views were
rejected at least during the critical period.
The opinion expressed in the draft report, in relation
to the Harker interview, about "AMLASH not being
a terrorist, " is correct. Should it be reconciled
with statements on Page 8?
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 9
-3
TOP SECRET
The report also says, here, "none of this other
activity would seem to warrant Castro's associating
that activity with U. S. leaders to the extent that he
would threaten the safety of American leaders aiding
the plans." We note without exception.
Page 33.
Footnote*. The Cuban Coordinating Committee was
a group for coordinating implementation of established
programs. By memorandum of 22 May 1963, McGeorge
Bundy, Special Assistant to President Kennedy for
National Security Affairs, designated the State Depart-
ment Coordinator of Cuban Affairs as Chairman of the
Interdepartmental Committee on Cuba with the specific
responsibility for the coordination of day-to-day actions
regarding Cuba. Membership of the Committee con-
sisted of representatives from State, USIA, DOD, CIA,
Justice, Treasury and ad hoc representatives as
necessary.
Footnote **. This seems to indicate that the FBI
learned of CIA's operations on 10 October 1963
(a new date?) and that this led to termination of the
AMLASH operation. Of course, that happened much
later.
Page 34.
"Special Affairs Staff" should read "Special Activities
Staff. "
Page 41.
SASICI should read SAS/CI.
Page 47.
Testimony of Karamessines is quoted, in which he is
asked a hypothetical question about use of AMLASH,
and that he answered hypothetically, but the presentation.
seems to treat it as fact.
Page 53.
:
Reference to CIA "technical" collection capability in
Mexico City should be deleted. Simply delete the
word "technical." This small point is a sources-
and-methods question.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 10
4-
TOP SECRET
The draft report states that an overseas Station
raised a question of AMLASH security. This is
taken out of context. Consideration had been given
to the possibility of using AMLASH/1 in the recruit-
ment of a prospective agent in another European
country. This prospective agent frequently traveled
to Soviet Bloc countries and recently had returned,
The cable noted that the prospective agent appeared.
less recruitable since his return and the Station felt
that the use of AMLASH to recruit the agent might
pose a serious threat to AMLASH's personal security.
It did not, in any manner, reflect on the security of the
AMLASH operation.
Pages56-57..
The 8 December 1963 cable from JMWAVE was in
reply to two cables sent from Headquarters on
7 December 1963 which clarified the reason for the
delay in laying down the cache. AMLASH had been
assured that he would be given time to re-establish
his normal pattern and assess the atmosphere and
feelings among his contacts. He was also told that
there would be no activity until January 1964. Further,
the Standing Group was to meet on 10 December 1963
to discuss US policy toward Cuba and Latin America.
If the Standing Group decided to recommend a change
in then current policy toward Cuba the conduct of
operations that might be counter to any recommended.
change in US policy objectives should not be under way.
Page 65.
Did the FBI learn the "details" of the AMLASH operation.
in July 1964? They learned of AMLASH's unhappiness
with his failure to get what he asked, but what else did
they learn beyond the fact of the relationship?
Pages 76-78.
This portion of the report makes reference to use of
the polygraph on "D" (also revealed in true name at
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 11
5
TOP SECRET
page 78) in checking his story. This is considered
a sensitive operational method, and deletion of use
of the polygraph in the interrogation is requested.
It seems interesting that this fabrication, which
proved to be an untrue report, receives so much
attention in the report. It really became a non-
story, although time was required to check it out.
Page 79.
The FBI was not denied access to "D". As the basis
for the statement is not known, it is not known in what
context the understanding developed. The Mexicans
did make "D" available for interrogation, at which the
FBI was present.
Page 104.
The draft report states that CI Staff was not "affiliated
with CIA's Cuban affairs staff," although later in the
piece it refers to SAS' CI people coordinating with
CI Staff. These appear contradictory statements.
Page 113.
Re the case of a man crossing the Mexican border
on 23 November then flying to Cuba. This case was
investigated and pertained to Gilbert Lopez, a U.S.
citizen who had secured a fifteen day Mexican tourist.
card at Tampa, Florida, on 20 November 1963. He
entered Mexico on this document at Neuvo Laredo on
23 November 1963. He checked into the Roosevelt
Hotel on 25 November 1963. On 27 November he
checked out of the hotel and departed for Havana
aboard a regularly scheduled Cubana Flight #2465.
He had a courtesy visa to visit Cuba. This was a
scheduled international flight and he happened to
be, according to the manifest, the only passenger.
6
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 12
TOP SECRET
Page 120.
It is requested that CIA support for DRE, JURE
and the 30th November Movement groups be altered
to a generic description of anti-Castro groups.
Persons identified with them in some circles could
suffer from official confirmation of the connection.
This is still considered as classified. It is noted
that CIA did not have an operational interest in
SNFE or Alpha 66.
Page 122.
The Agency effort to obtain FPCC stationery
through a penetration for use in a deception
operation is still classified since it involves
sources and methods.
Page 129. That the SAS Executive Officer views the AMLASH
operation as having been an assassination plot is
not very helpful, unless the time sequence and
evolution of the relationship with AMLASH/1 is
made a part of that view. His account in 1967
supported FitzGerald's story of what happened
in the 29 October 1963 meeting.
That SAS/CI speaks broadly may not be all that
helpful either, if the extent of his knowledge,
and when he knew what he says he knew, is
fixed in time. That he wrote a memorandum in
1965 on the security of the operation, does not
qualify him to address where things stood in
1963. In fact, he is quoted at page 139 as saying
that he could not recall the time frame.
Page 133.
The draft report states that in October 1963 the
FBI knew of the "assassination aspect of the
AMLASH" operation. As is noted earlier,
there was no such characterization that applied
to it then, so how it could have known is subject
to question.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 13
-7-
TOP SECRET
Page 134.
Comments have been made earlier on the significance
of the FBI's July 1964 report.
Page 135.
It is difficult to see how a "desk officer" who was unaware
of the AMLASH operation at the time, and did not learn
of it until he was told while testifying (as characterized
to him by the questioners), could have a very relevant
understanding of the operation. Yet he is quoted as an
authoritative source.
Page 137.
The opinion of the SAS Executive Officer as to the
irony of the 22 November 1963 meeting does not alter
the relevance of the facts as to what the substantive
sequence of the operational relationship had been.
Page 138. While the point is noted only in passing, that AMLASH/1
may have been a provocateur, it is noted that it would
have been strange logic for Castro to have sent him out
to stimulate an assassination plot against himself and then
used the result of his own provocation as the motive for
dispatching an assassin. And then jail his.own provocateur
for what is now some ten years. No evidence supports this thesi
Page 139. SAS/CI states he cannot recall the time frame, while the
sequence of events in development of the operational
relationship is a key factor in evaluating the present
issue.
Page 141-145.
The citation of 1964 events that do not specifically relate
back to the critical 1963 period have dubious relevance to
consideration of the problem, or fixing of the sequence of
events. The same seems to apply to 1965 events.
It is observed that "A" did make statements, but that the
polygraph was inconclusive. In any event, the use of the
polygraph should be deleted, because of its use in checking
the credibility of operational contacts. Request that
reference be made to questioning or interrogation, without.
this specific identification.
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 14
8
TOP SECRET
Page 161. The 1967 IG report did not consider the issue of when.
the operational relationship with AMLASH/1 developed
to the point where AMLASH/1 could feel he had CIA
support for his plans. It simply dealt with events as
they unfolded. The report was used as a primary
source for the brief capsulized summary of the AMLASH
operation that preceded this detailed series of comments.
General. It is requested that reference to cables follow the general
practice employed in the SSC report on alleged assassination
plots. The date the cable was sent, the quoted portion, and
the country of origin should suffice. Specific reference to
a CIA "Station" should be deleted; specific designation of a
CIA station in a given city can create undesirable difficulties.
References to IN and OUT numbers, or DIR numbers, and to
the date and time group of a cable, provide information that
is subject to hostile communications analysis and should
be removed. This technique for treating cables permits
the basic story to be told without providing unnecessary and
harmful, from a security point of view, information.
Instances in the draft presenting the question were noted
at pages 41, 46, 49, and 57. In addition, although JMWAVE
has already been identified officially in SSC published reports,
the basic treatment of communications cited in relation to
that Station should otherwise receive similar technical
treatment; see pages 19, 19a, 56, 106 and 138.
Special. Page 51 cites the CIA Chief of Station reading a cable to
the President of Mexico. CIA relations with the President
of a foreign country here, specifically, the President of
Mexico-- is extremely sensitive, both operationally and.
politically. The revelation of this relationship could affect
adversely ongoing and future operations in Mexico, as well.
as being a particularly irritating embarrassment to the
Mexican Government.
-9-
Photocopy
from
Gerald R. Ford Library
NW 50955 DocId:32105738 Page 15
TOP SECRET
