180-10110-10124
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 10/21/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER: 180-10110-10124
RECORD SERIES : SECURITY CLASSIFIED FILES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 155-JFK
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: HSCA
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE: 08/22/1978
PAGES: 2
SUBJECTS: CIA, ADMINISTRATION
DOCUMENT TYPE: SUMMARY
CLASSIFICATION: Unclassified
RESTRICTIONS: 1A
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 06/13/1997
OPENING CRITERIA : Box 5.
COMMENTS:
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId:32263529 Page 1
1
Interview of Doug Gupton, 8/22/78.
Douglas Gupton was interviewed by Dan Hardway and Gaeton Fonzi at
9?45 AM at CIA Headquarters at Langley. He was shown the letter of release
(omnibus) and stated that he understood it.
Mr. Gubton said that he was born on 5/9/29 and that he is currently
retired and living in Herndon, Virginia.
Mr. Gupton stated that he was an operations officer of the CIA in
1963 assigned to either the Covert Action division or the Uraguay/Paraguay
desk. Mr. Gupton said that he left Miami in mid 1961, one or two months
after the Bay of Pigs. Mr. Gupton_stated that he subsequently worked on
the Covert Action Guidance staff which provided support for CA projects.
He stated that Mexico City CA projects would habe been reviewed by the
CA Guidance Staff.
Mr. Gupton stated that he had used the name "Doug Gupton" as an
operational alias from approximately 4/60 to 6/60. Mr. Gupton said that
people in the Miami station would have known him by his true name but that
others outside of the station would have known him by his alias. He did
not use any alias other than Gupton during this time. He stated that the
use of more than one alias was uncommon but that it could have happened.
Gupton guesses that he has used maybe 3 or 4 aliases in his career and
that not all of them were registered. He said that the use of 200 or
more aliases would be "damned peculiar."
Mr. Gupton served with the CIA from 12/51 to 6/30/78. Prior to 1960
Gupton worked in Venezuela. He stated that he did not know Joseph B. Smith
or Frank Fiorini Sturgis. He did know E. Howard Hunt.
Mr. Gupton stated that he was in charge of propoganda operations in
the JMWAVE station. He said that he was often meeting Cuban agents directly
and that he also had a couple of Case Officers wou worked for him. He
provided guidance for those CO/s. He pointed out that his efforts were
limited to propoganda. Mr. Gupton stated that he was not involved in radio
Swan at all; that operation was handled directly out of Washington by
David Phillips. Gupton stated that Roberto Espin did not work on Radio
Swan but that he did do radio propoganda for a cousin of Raul Castro's wife.
These were commercial broadcasts from Miami on Agency purchased time. Mr.
Gupton said that he gave Espin "general guidance" but gave him pretty much
free reign otherwise.
Mr. Gupton..stated that he communicated with Dave Phillips, his boss in
Washington, by telephone and cable. He said that Phillips visited Miami
quite often.
Mr. Gupton said that his relationship with his Case Officers was informal.
He said that he would discuss: things with them rather than exercise formal
leadership.
Mr. Gupton was asked about the control the CO's exercised over the various
Cuban groups. Gupton said that there was a mutuality of interest and that the
exiles had a good respect for the U.S. and realized that we were their only
hope for the future. Gupton added that most of the exiles were sincere
patriots.
Mr. Gupton recalled the DRE and stated that he often met with the leader
of that group. He could not recall having met Salvat but does remember hearing
of him. Gupton said that he was personnally in contact with dozens of Cubans
ranging from representatives in media, labor, students, women, politics, etc.
Mr. Gupton said that with some of the Cubans he had daily contact. He said
he was in contact with Espin on the average of three times a week.
Gupton said that he did not coordinate his operations with Hunt whom he
met occassionally but more with Bender.
NW 50955 DocId:32263529 Page 2
Gupton-2
Gupton does not recall either Hunt or Phillips ever using the name
"Knight".. Gupton stated that he never met agents together with Phillips
and that he does not recall hearing Phillips use any name other than his
own.
Gupton did discuss his problems with Phillips but more often with the
Chief of Station.whom he thinks was Bob Reynolds. Gupton said that his main
concern was to keep Phillips informed and that he tried to solve his problems
himself.
Gupton said that he did not work with San Jenis.
Gupton stated that Ross Crozier was one of the Case officers who worked
for him. He said that he saw Crozier daily. He does not remember that
Crozier handled the DRE. He said that he would know what Crozier was doing
in general but not in detail. He said that there were periods when Crozier
would disappear for several days.
Gupton said that he was aware of the leaflet drops over Cuba after they
Phillips
had occured. He was not involved in the operation which Phillips had ran
out of Washington. Mr. Gupton pointed out that not all the propoganda was
coordinated in that Phillips did a lot of things on his own out of Washing-
ton that he did not let Gupton in on. Gupton stated that he had never met
Pedro Diaz Lanz. Gupton stated that there were two sets of operations.
His operations were ran out of Miami and he kept Phillips informed.
ran a second set of seperate operations personnally out of Washington and
he did not keep Gupton briefed on these operations. Gupton said that the
FRD also ran independent propoganda operations. Gupton stated that Phillips
used many of his old contacts from Havanna in his personal operations during
the Bay of Pigs. He said that one of these people was Luis Conte-Aguera.
Gupton said that Phillips did not do his trouble shooting for him and he does
not recall Phillips ever using the name Maurice Bishop. When confronted
generally with Crozier's story Gupton said "Well, maybe I did. I don't
remember." Gupton said that the sketch of Bishop did not look like anyone
he knew. He said that he had never heard the name Bishop in Miami.
He does not know Paul Bethel but remembers the name. He does not
know Companda. He did not meat Ted Shackly until he became chief of the
Division. He said that the name Salvador Diaz Verson was familiar and
also that of Jerry Buchanon but he does not remember that they were ever
used by the Agency. Gupton did state that Hal Hendrix was a friend of
Phillips. Gupton said that Phillips met him in Havanna and that Phillips
often used him to place articles in the Miami News.
Mr. Gupton stated that he had never heard of Celluma Fantasma.or
Alpha 66.
Gupton stated that he did not know Max Lesnick.
NW 50955 DocId:32263529 Page 3

