180-10147-10022
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
SECRET
THIS COPY IS NOT
FOR RELEASE.
Interview with Walter P. Halligan 3111157
Date: June 13, 1978
Interviewed by: Brekey Holdemeth and Belay Wolf
PROHIBITED
1. copy of the REPRODUCTION to the Halligan
who read it and indicated that we understood the context.
Mr. Halligan was given DELTA 435-173-A
which consists of a cover letter dated 12/12/63 from Robert M.
Campbell to the Chiefs of SR and We and to the list of Station
in Paris forwarding a memo dated 11/25/63 which was
written by Thomas B. Cesaris to Walter P. Halligan concerning
assassin prior involvement in Harvey Oswald. This document
served as the basis for our questioning.
Halligan stated that in 1963 he served as Chief of the Soviet
Section of the Paris station under diplomatic cover. He explained
that assassin was also an office in the Paris station but he
served under non-official cover and worked out of his home.
Using cut-outs to make contact with others in the Paris station.
Due to the nature of this arrangement, assassin frequently
wrote informal memos such as the one in #435-173-A which
were then passed along to the station. These memos would then
be forwarded to Headquarters, generally by Halligan. In
this particular instance, assassin, who served under Halligan,
forwarded the letter to REPRODUCTION Halligan
the hospital at the time. PROHIBITED.
Halligan explained the following portions of assassin's memo:
-"REDWOOD" represents the Soviet Assessor.
- the "B Branch" was the Operational Support and Research branch
for the Soviet Division. Its main function was to collection of
0003356
2
PAGE
COPY NO.
of
9
10147-10022
3111158
SECRET
information. Lassas was chief of the "Branch until his transfer
to Paris.
REPRODUCTION
- KUTUMP was the prettig for the office of Operations which
is currently known here as DED.
cryptonym of the office of Operations which
was used by officers who were ordered to contact a
returning defector, it would have made contact through this office.
However, Halligan stated that it probably was not standard opera-
ting procedure to interview returning defectors due to a variety
of factors such as a lack of proper follow-up measures or the
fact that these cases would have fallen into the jurisdiction
of the FBI.
- ODACID was the cryptonym for the State Department. Halligan
explained that it was not unusual that Cassar would have seen
a State Department dispatch on Oswald as it would have been
routine to receive misc of State Department memos.
- assassin's recollection of having discussed the Oswald case in
Summer 1960 as stated in the memo, must have been a mis-
take. Instead, he probably meant that of 1962.
- BI refers to biographic information.
- KUDOVE was a cryptonyn for a cover which was probably
a business firm. KUDOVE was the cryptonyn for the SDP.
Halligan explained that he was not in charge of the
REPRODUCTION
did not mean
DSP activities. Instead, his
sequence to priority Deferred only to his
Headquarters assignment within DDP.
- NEDCEAN was the Legal Traveller program, whereby they (the DDP)
gave certain travelling Soviet citizens access to certain
meetings which they reported back to the group then returned.
0003357
3
PAGE
COPY NO.
of
9
3111159
REPRODUCTION picked up in Paris for
the Legal Travellers program. He felt that he was
PROHIBITED
with an Acturist guide in the summer of 1962 and his wife
later. Halligan did not believe this to be a case like
the couple eventually divorced as this was after. Halligan
stated that it was not unusual for Harvey Oswald to be allied to
have the Soviet Union as not many Soviet wives were permitted
to have during that time period.
- Halligan was perplexed as to the reference to the "Harvey" story
in the last line of the memo. He first stated that it must have
been a typographical error which should have been the "Oswald
story". Instead, when it was pointed out that the sentence contained
two other references to Oswald which makes it unlikely that
this was merely a typographical error, he repressed commenting
on the respect to the reference. We could think of no explanation
for this point.
REPRODUCTION
PROHIBITED
3111159
Halligan recalled that he arrived in Paris for his assignment
in June, 1962 and that Lassas probably arrived there in September
of the same year. Halligan stated that he had never heard any
rumors to the effect that Oswald had been used by the CIA at
any time. He felt that because of his assignments with the
Agency, he would have been in a position to know if Oswald
had been used in any capacity. He mentioned that he had been
in Japan from 1951-1955 and lived in various cities there from.
0003358
4
PAGE
COPY NO.
of
9
1955 to 1958 1959.
REPRODUCTION in 52/9 which
was Special Operations Lieutenant. 52/9 was composed
of 6 persons of this tale to explain
for the Legal Travellers
program which utilized U.S. citizens and that
PROHIBITED
SR/2,3,4,5 responsible for running journeys
Since Halligan was generally apprised of these persons who were
travelling to the USSR under the program, he expressed the belief that
it was almost impossible for them not to have known if Oswald
had had some involvement with the Agency in this capacity.
Halligan advised that 5R/9 was responsible for maintaining its
own records which they kept in the same manner as DDP files.
If someone needed to know if a particular person was being used,
they would be able to check it through the files. However, Agency as-
sociation would not be directly reflected in a 201 file. Instead,
there would be a paper in the file indicating that operational
information would be stored. Halligan explained that a
201 file documents the person but not what the person is doing.
A 201 file would contain a PRO, Part I which is entirely Biograph-
ical information, a security check and newspaper clippings concerning
the individual, a case file, on the other hand, reflects the operational
information. A case REPRODUCTION such as
and the second number refers to the
accessibility of case files. Halligan stated that the area of primary
interest is reflected in a file opening sheet and that if someone
wanted to seek operational information.
When asked about the significance of 07/516 opening Oswald's 201
3111160
0003359
5
PAGE
COPY NO.
of
9
file, Halligan REPRODUCTION quite say ex ise des
not know what CI/F6 that the tone.
PROHIBITED
was asked to
Halligan
file of any operational information by removing any access cards in
the 201 file and then removing the pertinent information for the
case file. Halligan stated that he does not know of this type of thing
occurring in his experience. He stated that file maintenance was
essential for the protection of the operation and stressed that 52/9 in
particular was meticulous in its file maintenance.
REPRODUCTION
PROHIBITED
3111161
SECRET
0003360
6
PAGE
COPY NO.
of
9