180-10144-10073
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
11111348
SECRET
3111157
p1
Interview with Walter P. Haltigan
Date: June 13, 1978
Interviewed by: Mickey Moldemeth and Betty Wolf.
A copy of the omnibus letter was given to Mr. Haltigan
who read it and indicated that he understood the contents.
Mr. Haltigan was given a copy of LTA #435-173-A
which consists of a cover letter dated 12/12/63 from Robert G.
Hampell to the Chiefs of SR and WE and to the Chief of Station
in Paris forwarding a memo dated 11/25/63 which was
written by Thomas B. Casasin to Walter P. Haltigan concerning
Lasasin’s prior interest in Harvey Oswald. This document
served as the basis for our questioning.
Haltigan stated that in 1963 he served as Chief of the Soviet
Section of the Paris station under diplomatic cover. He explained
that Lasasin was not an officer in the Paris station but he
served under non-official cover and worked out of his home.
Using cut-outs to make contact with others in the Paris station.
Due to the nature of this arrangement, Lasasin frequently
wrote informal memos such as the one in #435-173-A which
were then passed along to the station. These memos would then
be forwarded to Headquarters, generally by Haltigan. In
this particular instance, Hampell, who served under Haltigan,
forwarded the letter to Headquarters because Haltigan was in
the hospital at the time.
Haltigan explained the following portions of Lasasin’s memo:
-“REDWOOD” represents the Soviet Division.
-“The 6 Branch” was SECRET
the Operational Support and Research Branch
for the Soviet Division. Its main function was to
10144-10073
Background Use Only
Do Not Reproduce
11111349
SECRET
3111158
p.2
information. Lasasin was Chief of the 6 Branch until his transfer
to Paris.
-KUTUMP was the cryptonym for the Office of Operations which
is currently known as the OCD. If the CIA wished to contact a
returning defector, it would have made contact through this office.
However, Haltigan stated that it probably was not standard opera-
ting procedure to interview returning defectors due to a variety
of factors such as a lack of proper follow-up measures or the
fact that these cases would have fallen into the jurisdiction
of the FBI.
-ODACID was the cryptonym for the State Department. Haltigan
explained that it was not unusual that Casasin would have seen
a State Department despatch as it would have been routine
to receive most of State Department memos.
-Lasasin’s recollection of having discussed the Oswald case in
Summer 1963 as stated in the memo, must have been a mis-
take. Instead, he probably should have meant the summer
of 1962.
-BI refers to biographical information.
-[LPOVER] was a cryptonym for a cover which was probably
a business firm. KUDOVE was the cryptonym for the BOP.
Haltigan explained that in paragraph 3, Lasasin’s claim
that he was phasing out of the DDP altogether. Instead, his
reference to phasing out of the DDP referred only to his
Headquarters assignment within DDP.
-[AE]OCEAN was the legal Traveller program, whereby they (the DDP)
gave certain persons to Soviet Union countries international assignments
which they reported back to the Agency then returned.
11111350
p.3
[AE]OCEAN use was one in which a person picked up in Europe for
the Legal Travellers program went to the USSR where he fell in love
with an Soviet guide, whom he married. He came out of the USSR
in the summer of 1962 and his wife was permitted to join him some
months later. Haltigan did not believe this to be a rare case,
however, Halligan did not believe this to be a rare case where
the couple was eventually divorced as this memo stated that it was unusual for Marina Oswald to be allowed to
leave the Soviet Union as not many Soviet wives were permitted
to leave during that time period.
-Haltigan was perplexed as to the reference to the “Harvey story”
in the last line of the memo. He first stated that it must have
been a typographical error which should have been the “Oswald
story” instead. When it was pointed out that the sentence contains
two other references to Oswald which makes it unlikely that
this was merely a typographical error, he expressed confusion
with respect to the reference. He could think of no explanation
for this, nor did he remember ever speaking to Casasin about
this point.
3111159
Haltigan recalled that he arrived in Paris for his reassignment
in June, 1962 and that Lasasin probably arrived there in September
of the same year. Haltigan stated that he had never heard any
rumors to the effect that Oswald had been used by the CIA at
any time. He felt that because of his assignments within the
Agency, he would have been in a position to know if Oswald
had been used in any capacity. He mentioned that he had been
in Japan from 1951-1955 and that Lasasin was there from
11111351
p.4
1955 to 1958 or 1959.
SECRET
From 1/58 until 4/61, Haltigan worked in SR/9 which
was Special Operations within the Soviet Union. SR/9 was composed
of 6 persons at this time. He explained that SR/10 was responsible
for the legal Travellers program which utilized U.S. citizens and that
SR/2, 3, 4, 5 were responsible for running foreigners in that program.
Since Haltigan was generally apprised of those persons who were
travelling to the USSR under the program, he expressed the belief that
it was almost impossible for them not to have known of Oswald
had had some involvement with the Agency in this capacity.
Haltigan advised that SR/9 was responsible for maintaining its
own records which they kept in the same manner as DAO files.
If someone needed to know if a particular person was being used,
they would be able to check it through the files. However, Agency association would not be directly reflected in a 201 file. Instead,
there would be a paper in the file referring to another file in which
operational information would be stored. Haltigan explained that a
201 file represents the person that is not what the person is doing.
A 201 file might contain a PRO, Part I which is entirely biographical
information, a security check and newspaper clippings concerning
the individual. A case file, on the other hand, reflects the operational
information. A case file would have a two part number, such as
74-6, where the first number reflects the country or area of interest
and the second number refers to the specific operation. In regard to the
availability of case files, Haltigan stated that the area of primary
interest is reflected on a 201 file opening sheet and that he would
go to that sheet to seek operational information.
When asked about the significance of 11/576 opening Oswald’s 201
11111352
SECRET
p.5
file, Haltigan responded that he wouldn’t really say as he doesn’t
know what CI/SIG was doing at the time.
Haltigan was asked whether it was possible to purge an individual’s
file of any operational information by removing any reference cards in
the 201 file and then removing the pertinent information from the
case file. Haltigan stated that he does not know of this type of thing
meaning in his experience. He stated that file maintenance was
essential for the protection of the operation and stressed that SR/9 in
particular was meticulous in its file maintenance.
3111161
SECRET

