180-10140-10187
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
DO NOT REPRODUCE
RETURN TO CIA
Interview with Walter P. Halligan 3111157
Date: June 13, 1978
Interviewed by: Mickey Goldenberg and Belay Wolf.
A copy of the omnibus letter was given to Mr. Halligan
who read it and indicated that he understood the context.
Mr. Halligan was given a copy of LTA #435-173-A
which consists of a cover letter dated 12/12/63 from Robert H.
Campbell to the Chiefs of SR and WE and to the Chief of Station
in Paris forwarding a memo dated 11/25/63 which was
written by Thomas B. Casasan to Walter P. Halligan concerning
Casasin's prior interest in Lee Harvey Oswald. This document
served as the basis for our questioning.
Halligan stated that in 1963 he served as Chief of the Soviet
Section of the Paris station under diplomatic cover. He explained
that Casasin was also an officer in the Paris station but he
served under non-official cover and worked out of his home,
using cut-outs to make contact with others in the Paris station.
Due to the nature of this arrangement, Casasin frequently
wrote informal memos such as the memo #435-173-A which
were then passed along to the station. These memos would then
be forwarded to Headquarters, generally by Halligan.
In this particular instance, Campbell, who served under Halligan,
forwarded the letter to Headquarters because Halligan was in
the hospital at the time.
Halligan explained the following portions of Casasin's memo:
-"REDWOOD" represents the Soviet Division.
-"6 Branch" was the Operational Support and Research Branch
for the Soviet Division. Its main function was collection of
FOLD 21
Stern #1
3111158
information. Casasin was chief of the 6 Branch until his transfer
to Paris.
-KUTUMP was the cryptonym for the Office of Operations which
is currently known as the DCD. If the CIA wanted to contact a
returning defector, it would have made contact through this office.
However, Halligan stated that it probably was not standard opera-
ting procedure to interview returning defectors due to a variety
of factors such as a lack of proper follow-up measures. He felt
that these cases would have fallen into the jurisdiction
of the FBI.
-ODACID was the cryptonym for the State Department. Halligan
explained that it was not unusual that Casasin would have seen
a State Department despatch on Oswald as it would have been
routine to receive most of State Department memos.
-Casasin's recollection of having discussed the Oswald case in
Summer 1960 as stated in the memo, must have been a mistake.
Instead, he probably meant the summer of 1962.
-BI refers to biographic information.
-LPOVER was a cryptonym for a cover which was probably
a business firm.
-KUDOVE was the cryptonym for the BOP. Halligan explained
that in paragraph 3, Casasin meant that he was phasing out of the
DDP altogether. Instead, his reference to phasing out of the DDP
referred only to the Headquarters design west within DDP.
-NEOCEAN was the legal Traveller program, whereby the DDP
gave certain travelling to Soviet countries additional require-
ments which they reported back to the Agency their status.
2945
140-10187
SECRET
3111159
NEOCEAN/B CASE was where a person picked up in foreign
is sent overseas guide, then to the USSR where he fills in
with the Soviet guide, then is married. He came out of the
USSR in the summer of 1962 and his wife persuaded to join him some
months later. Halligan did not believe this to be a case where
the couple was eventually divorced as this memo infers. Halligan
stated that it was unusual for Lee Harvey Oswald to be allowed to
have a Soviet wife as many Soviet wives were not permitted
to have during that time period.
-Halligan was perplexed as to the sequence to the "Harvey story"
in the last line of the memo. He first stated that it must have
been a typographical error which should have been the "Oswald
story" instead. When it was pointed out that the sentence contains
two other references to Oswald which makes it unlikely that this
was merely a typographical error, he expressed confusion
with respect to the reference. He could think of no explanation
for this, nor did he remember ever speaking to Casasin about
this point.
Halligan recalled that he arrived in Paris for his assignment
in June, 1962 and that Casasin probably arrived there in September
of the same year. Halligan stated that he had never heard any
rumors to the effect that Oswald had been used by the CIA at
any time. He felt that because of his assignments within the
Agency, he would have been in a position to know if Oswald
had been used in any capacity. He mentioned that he had worked
in Japan from 1951-1955 and that Casasin was there from
3111160
1955 to 1958 & 1959.
From 1/58 until 4/61, Halligan worked in SR/9 which
was Special Operations within the Soviet Union. SR/9 was composed
of 4 persons at this time. He explained that SR/9 was responsible
for the legal Travellers program which utilized U.S. citizens and that
SR/2, 3, 4 & 25 were responsible for running illegals in that program.
Since Halligan was generally apprised of those persons who were
travelling to the USSR under the program, he expressed the belief that
it was almost impossible for these not to have known if Oswald
had had some involvement with the Agency in this capacity.
Halligan advised that SR/9 was responsible for maintaining its
own records which they kept in the same manner as DAO files.
If someone needed to know if a particular person was being used,
they would be able to check it through the files. However, Agency as-
sociation would not be directly reflected in a 201 file. Instead,
there would be a paper in the file referring to another file in which
operational information would be stored. Halligan explained that a
201 file documents the person but not what the person is doing.
A 201 file contains a PRO, Part I which is entirely biographical
information, a security check and newspaper clippings concerning
the individual. A case file, on the other hand, reflects the operational
information. A case file would have a two-part number, such as
"717-6", where the first number reflects the country or area of interest
and the second number refers to the specific operation. In regard to the
accessibility of case files, Halligan stated that the area of primary
interest is reflected on a 201 file opening sheet and that one could
go to that sheet to seek operational information.
When asked about the significance of 07/516 opening Oswald's 201
3111161
file, Halligan responded that he wouldn't really say as he does
not know what 07/516 was doing at the time.
Halligan was asked whether it was possible to forge an individual's
file of any operational information by removing any reference cards in
the 201 file and then removing the pertinent information from the
case file. Halligan stated that he does not know of this type of thing
occurring in his experience. He stated that file maintenance was
essential for the protection of the operation and stressed that SR/9 in
particular was meticulous in its file maintenance.
SECRET