180-10144-10409
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JACK OS
FYI
• SECRET
ODO File Summary
Leslie Wizelman
3/2/78 χρυσόμα
Norman Rothman
Inclusive dates - 1951-1975
Rothman_is characterized on the 201 file review
form as
terminated).
a "former witting collaborator (relationship.
The 201 file_was_reviewech in 1925
An Oct 15, 1959 cable states that a new anti-Castro
organization with headquarters in miami at the Biltmore
Terrace Hotel is managed by Rothman "who is supposed to
proulde
Source thru Us Gangsters for guns and other
weapons...
An Oct 19, 1959 cable indicates that
Lis under indictment in Pittsburgh for the Interstate
Transportation of stolen Armi.
A
Rothman
Dec. 10, 1959 cables
states that Rothman is "going to Yucatan, mexico.
to seek a site fur
a base of operations against the ....
Castro gou't." A Dec 31, 1959 cable reports that
after Rothman_returned from mexico City he stated.
"We have a strip " A compatriot of Rothman, Eduardo.
whitehouse is later said to remark that "we
have the planes,"
The cable states "Believed that both
subs. Cha. Rothman] and Whitehouse are acquiring planes
for purpose of setting up base of operations in Yucatan
Peninsula for anti-castro group headed by Col. Orlando
Piedra and Roberto Fernandez miranda."
A cable dated Feb 5, 1960 reports that Rothman has been......
released from the
Allegheny County Jail after an appeal bond.
was
posted
A
;;
June 23, 1960 cable reports that Rothman...
was convicted of interstate transportation of firearms stolen...
from the National Guard Armory in Canton, Ohio... He.........
received a 5 year sentence.
SECRET
A 10,000 fine
G
180-10144-10409
SECRET
OD
Sept 27, 196 cable to the Director from _MASH (0828).
1. FBI has advised of approach made to Frank
Fiorini for procurement of two MIG aircraft which would be
brought to states by one Czech and one_Cuban_pilot. Approach
made by Norman_Rothman who is _hood_indicted for
gun
cunning and stolen bonds currently out on $50,000 bund.
"2. FBI contact felt Rothman interest was_straight profit motive or
hope for favorable_treatment re above rap. Contact stated no
chance whatever latter and that had advised Florin that FBI
could not handle sich a deal but would pass to other interestech
4.S. gou't agency. Said that inspite of abae derag into believed Rothman
could very probably produce.
"3. Has Has any interest pursue."
Headquarters
//
responded on Sept 28, 1960 (Dir 02972).
stating, "It Ret para 1 plan involves detection of MIG
from Cuba Has vitally interestea....
and Czech pilot
Advise all pertinent details."
"
)
JMASH responded
00
Oct 1,1960 (MASH 0891):
View Rothman forthcoming trial local FBI feels
Justice Department
be advised prior any CIA contact subj
This to prevent any complication_prosecution if op succeeds.
and Rothman attempts. make deal re possible prison term..
2. Per telecon 29 sept MASH advised HQs Santiago
Rey also approached by Rothman with same plan ret A
[MISPLANE] If HQS decides go ahead withops, MASH Plan.
L
:
make contact through Rey..".
This cable was followed b
from mast...
SECDE
by another cable to the Directore
dated Oct 20, 1960 (MASA 1162) stating.
SECRET
(3)
Request replies to
rets Leeferences are masit 0625;
MASH 0891), FBI still has open case Ret A and has
called several times. Also desire give positive answer to
Santiago Rey on ref B."
No responding cable from Hag.
13 contained in this file
The file contained two_memoranda_for the record prepared
by Catherine La Maistre, dated June 30, 1961 and July 10, 1961.
The June 30 memo contains the following information:
a- Rothman's DOB 13 26 Dec 1914; POB is Bronx, NY.
"When Rothman first came to CIA's attention_in_
b-
Sept 1958, he was living in Dallas, Texas and was.
allegedly engaged in public relations work. According to his wife,
Gloria, he made a one-week trip to Los Angelos in September_
on undisclosed business."
by
c- In oct 1959, Rothman was managing the Biltmore
Terrace Hotel in miami trom which he was reported the FBI
to be supplying an anti-castro organization with arms which
he obtained through us gangsters
"
d. Following Pittsburgh conviction, Rothman went to
Chicago, where he surrendered on charges of playing a key role
in one of the biggest robberies in modern criminal history, the
$13.5 million looting of a Canadian bank. "Robbery was
touched of f when the Canadian branch of the mafia received a
hurry-up-order from the caribbean for arms. The Canadian
mafia did not have the money to buy arms, os, but .it it knew how
to get hands on the contents of the Brockville, Ontario bank
It called upon the U.S. matia for assistance, and it was then...
that Rothman entered the picture
picture, it was charged. #5
SECRET
Subsequently
SECRET
Loot
portions of
and Australia."
turned up in Shanghai, Argentina, Cuba,
e-Before Rothman was tracked down_in_connection with the _above
crimes, he was reported by the FBI as traveling to Yucatan to
seek
prise
-abase of_operations against the Castro gout. In this enter-
he was associated with (Teddy) whitehouse Insua, formerly
of the Cuban Civil Aeronautical Association, ex-Colona/
Orlando_Piedra_Negueruela & former member of_BRACond
head_of_Cuban Bureau of Investigations, and Colonel Roberto
Fernandez Miranda brother-in-law of Batista_and former
commander of the presidential guards as well as president
of the National Sports Commission While no mention is_made_
in this connection, Rothman_has_engaged.
in meny exploits.
and deals with Masferrer."
f. " In Sept 1960 Rothman still out on $50,000 bond,
made an_approach to Frank Fiorini, soldier of_fortune,
offering to obtain two migs- one flown by a Czech
and another by a Cuban Florini felt that Rothman's_interes
was stimulated by a straight profit motive or by hopes
for favorable _treatment regarding the_Fed case against him."
__g. In_Oct 1960, Rothman again_appeared in Dallas,
where he
Robert E_Grinnan, an 011
contracts_promotion man, Rothman claimed to have
approached.
connections with Nor-Roth Industries of NYC and stated
that clients of his had an interest in purchasing /½million
metric tons of dies al fuel oil and 1 million metricton.
of crude oil
to be delivered over a five-year period
to Hamberg, Germany. Grinnan, puzzled by the otter,
SECRET
reported to the FBI He went to 2.4.5_November and met
Rothman and the other principals of the deal a mary.
Talley
and a Dr. Phillip Paneth de Panay. Largely
because of Grignants suspicions the deal
consumated.
"
wow_never
h." As of December 19605_Rothman was living in
Dallas, Texas."
The second memorandum for the record (July 10, 1961)
contains additional background information and an updated
on Rothman
location
that
The memo__indicates Better during
the Batista regime, Roth man was the supervisor of
slot machines in Camaguey province under the national
Supervisor, Alberto Ardura moya, who was one of owners
of the Tropicana night club in Havang...
that recent reports place Rothman in miami.
the
The memo states
for the
The file also contains a memorandum.
Deputy Chief of the western Hemisphere Division from Clark
w.simmons re a meeting with Rothman and David m
McConnell.
The memo is dated
June 30,1961. The meeting
occurred on June 29, 1961, at the Deputy Attorney General's office
and was for the purpose of
evaluating "Rothman's claim to
Operationzi assets inside Cuba and elsewhere in the Caribbean
mcConnell
area
An agreement was made that staten would be
notified of Rothman's "operationzl potential in cuban affairs" org
record
July 5. (There is no
further communication with
in the file of there any
mcconnell).
SECRET
At the beginning of the meeting mcConnel) spoke to Simm
privately. Maconnell described himself
as
a "leading political
figure in the Democratic Party machine in N. Carolina" and
statea he was acquainted with Robert Kennedy, General Taylor, and
General van Fleet
was
McConnell is a corporate tax attorney and
concerned_about the embarassment to the kennedy.
administration
A
caused by the Cuban "frasco." He stated that
Rothman chims to have assets and capabilities which would
enable Rothman to destroy the arms dumps on the
plantation of ex-president Cardenas of mexico, to set up
operational_bases in the Yucatan at a cost of $50-$1,000, to
sabatoge targets.
and to provide
in cuba.
Identified by the US gov't
-positive intelligence_on the activities_of
Chinese Communist Groups
in the
Western Hemisphere
when Rothman was questodong questioned by Simmons he
made the following_points:
1- Castro_bad_executed three of his close frienas:
(Francisco-war name)
Rogelio Gonzalez
Sori mario, and Efigenio Fernandez
2- Bothman has the operational capability to destroy arms.
dumps of Cardenas. He has agent assets in mexico with whom he
he made contact 4 to 5 months ago.
4-
3. He had Indians construct an airstrip in the Yucatan
One 8-26 had landed there..
He is well acquainted with sanchez Arango and.
considers him a close personal friend
weeks agu.
He last_met Arango_6
5- He has the personnel and capabilities to attacle or
sabatoge any target of our choosing in Cuba...
SECRET
He has ar
basic plan_for assassination of Castro. The plan called for an
air attack with napalm against Castro when he was addressing.
a rally. He has _100 pilots who had participate in the
invasion of Cuba and are now working for the Congolese fir Force.
Rothman would not identity the pilots.
6. Rothman said he had many agents going in and out of Cuba
He is in contact with
6 agents at this time. The agents.
are in the tourist travel business or import-export busines)
and enter the US, through 3rd countries.
1- He knows of many Chinese communists_going into
Canada from Cuba.
He
said
8. Rothman expressed resentment over gun-running.
charges.
"that CIA used the same people in these
gun running activities and the same houses,.. for which he
(mr.Rothman) was being prosecuted by the Federal Government..
He said that he had supervised 40 ship operations on behalf
of the Frente against Cuba. He said that CIA would truck
the stuff to the point of ship pick-up, where he (Mr. Rothman)
would supervise the loading of the ships. He said that he
Purchased the 20ft ship "ree fer" which was_the first
boat to support the underground in Cuba. He added that
he knew everything the CIA planned in maritime operations
and for the invasion...."
had
9- Rothman stated he is a close friend of John Abbes
Chief of Dominican Republic Security.
Garcia
At the
conclusion of the memorandum, Simmons comments
that he did not believe
Rothmap's claim of controlling
SECRET
agents
and material assets. He recommences that there be no
further discussion
with eothman re these a claims
Simmons notes from this meeting give mcConnell's
address as
Charlote, N.Carolina.
Tnú memo inchides.
additional comments made by Rothman -
a- Claims to_know Prio, Betancourt
:
b. "suspects Patrick op as being funny and ill-adused."
In the last year_Rothman has met Arango 20-25 times.
Rothman knows
friends i
"
Garcia" and "Tito"
is_ Rothman's_personal pilot.
d. Austin Young
e-
He last_visited the Dominican Rep. in 1959 erthe
purpose of communicating with assets and contacts. Jonn Abbes
asked Rothman
do Job"
The file_also contains some_information on Eduardo
Orlando Piedra, and Miranda Fernandez
Whitehouse
I. Eduardo Julio Whitehouse Insua (DOB-3-14-14)
aka Teddy" whitehouse is described as a compatriot of Rothman's
An April 5, 1960 report states that whitehowe and Ell١٥+
Spinning intended to take a B-26 to Vera Cruz. Sam Rubin
(believed to be identical with Sam "Stretch Rubin, chief
doorman at the Biltmore Terrace
Hotel) _was_reported to be
the owner of the B-26 (Reg #N32446).
A Dec. 31, 1959
report indicates that 4.1. Customs seized a B-26 at miami and
another (N28816) at vero Beach, when whitehouse and
A 12 Dec 1960 report
Spinning attempted to move them
states that whitehouse was responsible for se ting fire
to the sugar crops in early 1960 States he wow asked by
SECRET
Alberto Fernandez
SECRET
for help. Fernandez has set up a
A
13 Feb 1961 report states that
Rorke, Jr., Whitehouse has
guerilla organization.
according to Alexander H
70 pilots available and ready to take drastic action against
Castro and have worked out a "definite plan of action"
to accomplish "Castro's overthrow."
日
I. Orlando Piedra
Piedra was formerly in charge of the Dept. of Investigation.
A 8 Jan 1960 report states that
under Batista.
according to Enrique Fernandez
Parajon, both he and
Piedra are heading the "military section" of the counter-
revolutionary group which is receiving monetary support
from Batista. A
4 march 1960 report indicates Piedra
met or planned to meet with General Jose Pedraza during
the latter's visit to washington. Piedra is_described as a
member of BRAC who fled Cuba on Jan 1۱۹۳۹
Reference is made to a New Orleans FBI report, dated
march 27, 1961. On Oct 2, 1959 there is_a report that
Piedra received orders by Batista thru Jae Suarez Nunez to
Immediately consolidate anti-Castro forces..
Miranda Fernandez - There is one report, 3-8-61, which
states Miranda admited to furnishingaid
to Rolando masferrer in 1959-1960. He stated he is now
providing aid and assistance to his former military.
regiment who are still in cuba working against Castro,
He thinks the group is associated with FRD...
SECRET
END
NO

