180-10147-10193
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassinatior. System
Identification Form
Agency Information
Date: 4/28/201
AGENCY:
HSCA
RECORD NUMBER:
180-10147-10193
RECORD SERIES :
CIA SEGREGATED COLLECTION
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 61-12-01
Document Infor nation
ORIGINATOR:
FROM:
HSCA
CIA
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
12/11/1978
PAGES:
329
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA:
CIA, FILES
FORM
Unclassified
1A; 1B,
Redact
01/01/2003
COMMENTS:
Box 35 Document Withdrawal Notice Pending Coordination
v9.1
NW 47055 DocId:32273548 Page 1
1
TOPS
UNCLASSIFIED when when blank TOP SECRET when attached to Top Secret Document Automatically downgraded or declassi
fied when filled in form is detached from controlled document.
CONTROL AND COVER SHEET FOR TOP SECRET DOCUMENT
DOCUMENT DESCRIPTIONS
SOURCE
HSC A
DOC NOK 05
DOC DATE
COPY NO or
UMBER OF PAGES
NUMBER OF ATTACHMENTS
REGISTRY
CIA CONTROL NO
DATE DOCUMENT RECEIVED
LOGGED BY
ATTENTION: This form will be placed on top of and attached to attached to each Top Secret document received by treceived by the Central Intelligence Agency
or.classified Top Secret within the CIA and will remain attached to the document until such time as it is downgraded, destroyed for
transmitted outside of CIA Access to Top Secret matter is limited to Top Secret Control, personnel and those individuals whose oficial
duties relate to the matter! Top Secret Control Of Officers who receive and/or release the exand/or release the attached Top Secret et material will sign this form
and indicate period of custody in the left-hand columns, provided. Each provided. Each individual who sees the Top Secret document will sign and
indicate the date of handling in the right-hand columns.
REFERRED TO
OFFICE
RECEIVED
SIGNATURE
RELEASED
DATE TIME DATE TIME
SEEN BY
SIGNATURE
OFFICE/DIV
NOTICE OF DETACHMENT: When this form is detached from Top Secret material it shall be completed in the appropriate spaces below
and transmitted to Central Top Secret Control for record.
TO
BY (Signature)
OFFICE
USE
DOWNGRADED
DESTROYED
BY (Signature)
WITNESSED BY (Signature)
DATE
OFFICE
DISPATCHED (OUTSIDE CIA)
TO
BY (Signature)-
DATE
OFFICE
DATE
1
Classification: TOP SECRET
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
Cover Sheet
The attached package of paper is the property of
the ilouse Select-Committee on Assassinations, and is
on loan to CIA under an agreement whereby CIA is not
to reproduce or copy the draft or any portion thereof.
Notes may be taken on materials in this package,
and rough notes may be prepared as a basis for informal
and oral exchanges with HSCA representatives. These
notes, however, are to be held as though controlled and
are to be destroyed under agreed conditions with HSCA.
They are not to be copied or excerpted and are to be
held until further instructions are received for
eventual disposal.
These papers have been numbered for accountability
and receipted accordingly. They are to be handled on
a secure basis as though constituting sensitive papers
en a need-to-know basis.
Classification:
i
۳۱
:
Copy
of
TOP SECRET
Classified by derivation:
TS 780541 A Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
C. Silvia Duran
TOP SECRET
When President John F. Kennedy was assassinated
on November 22, 1963, the United States investigative
agencies--FBI, CIA, Secret Service, etc.--were asked to
investigate the assassination. When the Central Intelli-
gence Agency's Mexico City Station remembered that Lee
Harvey Oswald had visited Mexico City during late Septem-
ber and early October, it reviewed the electronic surveil-
lance files and found evidence of phone calls to the So-
viet Embassy made September 27th, September 28th, and
October 1st, that could have been made by Oswald. 685/
Review of the electroic surveillance files also produced
telephone calls on September 27, 1963 between the Russian
Consul and Silvia Duran, a secretary at the Cuban Consu-
late, where Oswald was discussed. 686/ In addition,
the Mexico City Station found a September 28, 1963 phone
call from Silvia Duran to the Soviet Consulate where Silvia
Duran stated that there was an American citizen at the
Cuban Consulate who had previously visited the Soviet Con-
sulate. 687/ A final phone call was made on October 1, 1963
where the "alleged" Oswald identified himself was also
found. 688/
On November 23, 1963 the Mexico City Station deter-
2000901
@FADTY 2/201
Classification: TOP SECRET
by derivation:
351
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
185
TOP SCURET
mined that it would request the Mexican government--
with whom it had a good relationship--to arrest Silvia
Duran (as Silvia Duran was a Mexican citizen, she did not
have diplomatic immunity) because she might shed some light
on the circumstances surrounding the assassination. 688a/
The Mexico City Station sent a note to the Gober-
nacion head, Luis Echevarria, with Silvia Duran's address,
her mother's address, her brother's address, her license
plate number, her home phone number, her place of work and
a request that she be arrested immediately. 689/ The Mexi-
co City Station also suggested that Duran he held incommuni-
cado until she could be questioned on the matter. 690/
The Mexico City Station did not receive prior au-
thorization from CIA Headquarters to request the arrest of
Silvia Duran by Mexican authorities. 691/ Headquarters
feared that a request to arrest Ms. Duran would jeopardize
the clandestine relationship between certain Mexican govern-
ment officials and the CIA if it were disclosed that Americans
were behind Duran's arrest. 672/ John Scelso, Chief of Western
Hemisphere/3, stationed at Langley Headquarters, telephoned
Winston Scott, the Mexico City Chief of Station, and requested
that Silvia Duran not be arrested. 693/ Scott told Scelso that
he could not rescind the request, and that Headquarters should
already have asisificatioable stating that Silvia Duran had
2000902
TOP SERD
Classified by derivation:
302
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
186
been arrested. 694/ After Winston Scott's conversation
with John Scelso, Scott called Luis Echevarria and stated
that the Mexico City Station desired that all information
received from Duran be forwarded immediately to the Mexico
City Station, and that her arrest and statements not be
communicated to any leftist groups. 695/
On November 27, 1963, the Mexican government for-
warded to the Mexico City Station a copy of Silvia Duran's
ten-page signed statement. 696/ It said,
"Upon learning about the assassination
she and her husband speculated that Presi-
dent Kennedy might have been assassinated
for racial reasons. When she became aware
that the assassin was Lee Harvey Oswald, she
ascertained that it was the same man who ap-
proximately two months prior had been to the
Cuban Consulate to solicit an intransit visa
to Russia. Having taken his name from the
special documentation he presented she knew
that he was married to a Russian woman and
belonged to the "Fair Play for Cuba Committee."
She checked the data in the Consulate archives
and became certain that it was the same indi-
vidual who was blonde, short, dressed unelegant-
ly and whose face turned red when angry.
Consul had denied the visa because to obtain
an intransit visa from the Cuban government,
it was imperative that he previously obtain a
visa from the Soviet Consulate. Since obtain-
ing a visa from the Soviets took four months
and Oswald's Mexican visa expired soon Oswald
was advised that he see the Soviet Consul, and
calling the person in charge of that office.
The Soviet official told her that they would
have to consult Moscow which would take four
months. That afternoon, Oswald returned to the
Classification:
The
2000903
;
303
Classified by derivation:
4
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
187
-
Cuban Consulate and Silvia Duran confirmed
that he could get a Cuban visa only after he
received a Russian visa. She gave Oswald her name
and business phone number but never gave him her
address because she had no reason to give it to
him. The only aid she could give Oswald was advising
that he see the Soviet Consul and calling the person
in charge of that office. She knew that phoning the
Soviet Consulate was not one of her duties and that
if she did so she did it only to help Oswald. She
gave Oswald her business phone number only because he
would have to call subsequently to check whether he
had obtained a visa. He never called back."
Silvia Duran, released on November 24, 1963, was rearrested
November 27, 1963, when the Mexican government alleged that she
was attempting to leave Mexico for travel to Havana. 698/
According to the Mexican officials who detained Duran a second
time, there was no addition to her story. 699/
The Mexico City Station forwarded Duran's ten-page signed
statement to Headquarters on November 27, 1963. 700/ The
following day, Headquarters sent a clarification cable to the
Mexico City Station seeking to insure that neither Silvia
Duran nor the Cubans would have any basis for believing that
the Americans were behind her rearrest. The cable stated,
"We want the Mexican authorities to take the responsibility
for the whole affair." 701/
When the Central Intelligence Agency began to work
with the Warren Commission, Headquarters cabled the Mexico
1
1
2000001
Classification:
Classified by derivation:
354
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
188
TOP SECRET
City Station that its plan in passing information to the
Warren Commission was to eliminate mention of telephone
taps in order to protect their continuing operations. 702/
Headquarters cabled that it would rely on Silvia Duran's
statements and on the Consular files which the Soviets
gave the State Department. 703/ Headquarters stressed
that exact, detailed information from LITAMIL-7 and
LITAMIL-9--penetration agents in the Cuban Embassy--on
what Silvia Duran and other officials had said about Os-
wald's visit and his dealings would be valuable and usable
corroborative evidence. 704/
When the Central Intelligence Agency forwarded to
the Warren Commission a copy of Duran's signed statement.
It read as follows:
...she remembered..(that Lee Harvey Oswald)
was the name of an American who had come to
the Cuban Consulate to obtain a visa to travel
to Cuba in transit to Russia, the latter part
of September or the early part of October of
this year, and in support of his application
had shown his passport, in which it was noted
that he had lived in that country for a period
of three years; his labor card from the same
country written in the Russian language; and
letters in that same language. He had presented
evidence that he was married to a Russian woman,
and also that he was apparently the leader of
an organization in the city of New Orleans
claim-
ing that he should be accepted as a "friend" of
the Cuban Revolution. Accordingly, the declarant,
complying with her duties, took down all of the
2000905
Classification:
305
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
189
information and completed the appropriate
application form; and the declarant, ad-
mittedly exceeding her responsibilities,
informally telephoned the Russian Consulate,
with the intention of doing what she could
to facilitate issuance of the Russian visa
to Lee Harvey Oswald. However, they told
her that there would be a delay of about
four months in processing the case, which
annoyed the applicant since, according to
his statement, he was in a great hurry to
obtain visas that would enable him to travel
to Russia, insisting on his right to do so
in view of his background and his loyalty
and his activities in behalf of the Cuban
movement. The declarant was unable to re-
call accurately whether or not the applicant
told her he was a member of the Communist
Party, but he did say that his wife***was
then in New York City, and would follow
him,*** (Senora Duran stated) that when Os-
wald understood that it was not possible to
give him a Cuban visa without his first hav-
ing obtained the Russian visa,*** he became
very excited or angry, and accordingly, the
affiant called Consul Ascue (sic),*** (who)
came out and began a heated disucssion in En-
glish with Oswald, that concluded by Ascue
telling him that "if it were up to him, he
would not give him the visa," and "a person
of his type was harming the Cuban Revolution
rather than helping it," it being understood
that in their conversation they were talking
about the Russian Socialist Revolution and
not the Cuban. Oswald maintained that he had
two reasons for requesting that his visa be
issued promptly, and they were: one, that his
tourist permit in Mexico was about to expire;
and the other, that he had to get to Russia
as quickly as possible. Depsite her annoyance,
the decalarant gave Oswald a paper*** in which
she put down her name, "Silvia Duran," and
the number of the telephone at the Consulate,
which is "11-28-47" and the visa application
Classification:
2000908
336
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
190
was processed anyway. It was sent to the
Ministry of (Foreign) Relations of Cuba; from
which a routine reply was received some fifteen
to thirty days later, approving the visa, but on
the condition that the Russian visa be obtained
first, although she does not recall whether or
not Oswald later telephoned her at the Consulate
number that she gave him. 705/
The Central Intelligence Agency had relied on Duran's
statements but had deleted Duran's description of Oswald as
blonde and short. 706/ It had also excised Duran's statement--
"The only aid she could give Oswald was advising that he see
the Soviet Consul, and calling the person in charge of that
office" which alluded to Oswald asking for some type of aid at
the Cuban Consulate. 707/ In addition, Ms. Duran's strong state-
ment "He never called her back" 707a/ was changed to "she does
not recall whether or not Oswald later telephoned her at the
Consulate number that she have him,707b/ Had the statements
been included, the Warren Commission's conclusions would not have
seemed as strong.
۱۱
The Warren Commission staff was not completely satis-
fied with Ms. Duran's ten page signed statement obtained by
the Mexican authorities. W. David Slawson wrote:
We then discussed...the problem of (inter-
viewing) Silvia Duran. We pointed out that
our only interest in witnesses (in Mexico)
other than Duran was to get their formal testi-
mony for authentication purposes...This was
not true of Duran, however, because she had
been interviewed only by the Mexican police
رن
2000307
Classification
TOP SE
1
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
191
and we considered that interview inadequate.
(I should point out that we do not consider
it totally inadequate, however. It is only
on details such as Oswald's physical
appearance, side comments or remarks he
may have made, etc., that we would like to
interrogate Mrs. Duran further. On the
essential point of whether or not his con-
tacts with the Embassy consisted of anything
other than an attempt to travel to Cuba,
Silvia Duran's knowledge has probably been
exhausted.) 708/
The Warren Commission staff's attempts to inter-
view Ms. Duran never succeeded. 709/ Ms. Duran was not
interviewed by Americans until 1976, when two reporters
from the Washington Post interviewed her. 710/ On
June 6, 1978, representatives of the House Select Committee
(on Assassinations interviewed Ms. Duran in Mexico City.
1
VI. Information not available at the time of the Warren
Commission investigation
A. Silvia Tirado (nee Duran)
1. House Select Committee on Assassinations 6/6/78
Interview of Silvia Tirado
Ms. Tirado (Silvia divorced Horatio Duran in 1968)
was never questioned by American officials in 1963. Thus,
the Committee established contact with the Mexican govern-
ment and requested that the Mexican government make
Silvia Tirado available for an interview. 711/ The Mexican
2000303
Classification: TOD
338
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 192
government complied on 6/6/78. Ms. Tirado told the House
Select Committee on Assassinations the following:
Lee Harvey Oswald visited the Cuban Consulate three
times on September 27, 1963, not twice as the Warren Com-
mission previously reported. 712/ Oswald first visited
the Cuban Consulate at approximately 11:00 a.m., requesting
an intransit visa to Cuba with Russia as the final destina-
tion. 713/ He showed her some documents, then left to
obtain photographs needed for his application. 714/
Oswald returned at approximately 1:00 p.m. with
four photographs. 715/ Ms. Tirado typed the application
in duplicate, stapled a picture on top of each and had Os-
wald sign each in her presence. 716/ As identification,
Oswald showed her documents he had brought: his Russian
labor card, marriage certificate with the name of his
Russian wife, his American Communist Party membership card
and his "Fair Play for Cuba" membership card. 717/
Ms. Tirado found Lee Harvey Oswald's behavior suspi-
cious because normally a Communist traveled only with his
passport as belonging to the Communist Party was illegal
in Mexico in 1963. 718/
There was a procedure whereby the American Communist
Party would arrange visa matters for their members with the
2000900
Classification:
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 193
Cuban Communist Party. 719/ The American would then
come to Mexico, visit the Cuban Consulate, and receive
his visa immediately. 720/ When Tirado asked Oswald why
he did not have the American Communist Party arrange his
trip to Cuba, he stated that he had not had the time. 721/
After explaining to Oswald that he had to acquire
a Russian visa before he could receive a Cuban visa, Tirado
jotted her name and business phone number on a piece of
paper and gave it to Oswald who then left to get his Rus-
sian visa. 722/
Oswald returned to the Cuban Consulate between
5:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., which was after normal working
hours, 10:00 to 2:00 p.m. 723/ The guard called Tirado,
stating that someone who did not speak Spanish was at the
gate inquiring about a visa. 724/ As routine procedure,
she asked the guard to escort the individual to her office. 725/
Oswald told her that he had acquired a Russian visa. 726/
Since he did not produce it when asked, she called the
Russian Consulate. 727/ The Consul told Duran that Oswald
had been to the Consulate requesting a visa and had been
told that the reply would take approximately four months. 728/
When she relayed the message to Oswald, he got very excited,
insisting that as a person who had been in jail because
2000310
Classification:
350
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 194
of the Cuban Revolution he should receive a visa. 729/
Oswald stated that he could not wait that long because
his Mexican visa expired in three days. 730/ At this
point, Ms. Tirado informed Consul Eusebio Azcue of the
situation. 731/ Azcue had been in his private office
which he shared with his upcoming replacement, Alfredo
Mirabal. 732/ Azcue politely explained the requisites
for an intransit visa to Oswald. 733/ When he noticed
that Oswald was a stubborn man he told Oswald that he
was obviously not a friend of the Cuban revolution be-
cause he would otherwise understand that Cuba had to be
extremely careful with the people it allowed in the coun-
try. 734/ Azcue and Oswald yelled at each other. 735/
Then Azcue went to the door, opened it and asked Oswald
to leave. 736/ Oswald did not revisit or telephone the
Consulate. 737/ Ms. Tirado described Lee Harvey Oswald
as approximately five feet six, with sparse blonde hair,
weighing about 125 pounds. 738/
2. CIA information not available at the time of
the Warren Commission investigation
a. LIRING/3 allegation
In 1967 a report that Silvia Duran had had intimate
relations with Lee Harvey Oswald came to the attention
2000311
Classificatiom
TOP SECRET
-361
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 195
of the Central Intelligecne Agency's Mexico City Station. 739/
The source, LIRING/3, stated that he had recently re-
ceived a call from Silvia Duran. 740/ A telephone tap
on LIRING/3's telephone confirmed that Silvia Duran had
called LIRING. 741/ LIRING/3 reported that he had visited
Silvia to renew acquiaintancees. 742/ During the visit,
Duran told LIRING/3 that she had met Lee Harvey Oswald
at the Cuban Consulate when he applied for a visa and
had dated him on several occasions. 743/ Duran admitted
that she had had intimate relations with Oswald, but in-
sisted that she had no idea of his plans. 744/ In addi-
tion, Duran told LIRING/3 that when the news of the as-
sassination became public knowledge, the Mexican govern-
ment arrested her and during the interrogation beat her
until she admitted that she had had an affair with Lee
Harvey Oswald. 745/ Rowton 746/ counseled LIRING/3
against any further contact with Duran because the Cubans
or the Mexican police might become suspicious of him. 747/
There is no indication in Rowton's report as to why con-
tact with Silvia would make the Cubans suspicious.
The CIA Mexico City Station reported this informa-
tion to Headquarters:
2000312
First, that Silvia Duran had sexual intercourse
Classification
30?
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 196
with Lee Harvey Oswald on several occasions
when the latter was in Mexico is probably
new, but adds little to the Oswald case.
Second, the Mexican police did not report
the extent of the Duran-Oswald relationship
to this Station. 749/
In the chronology of the Mexico City investigation
of Oswald, Raymond
Rocca notes: "Why didn't Mexico
police give us all info?" 750/ This was not the first
report of such a relationship between Oswald and Duran.
Elena Garro had reported the same information to Charles
Thomas in 1965. 751/
That the Mexican government did not disclose all
the information in its possession to American authorities
raises one of three possibilities:
1) the Mexican government did not want to disclose
that one of its citizens had had intimate rela-
tions with the assassin of John Kennedy; or
2) Silvia Duran was a Mexican penetration agent
in the Cuban Consulate and the Mexican govern-
ment was protecting its informant by minimizing
her relationship with Oswald; or
3) they forgot, i.e., a pure and simple mistake.
الية
Classification:
2000913
-307
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 197
b. The possibility that Silvia Duran was an
agent for either American, Mexican or Cuban
Intelligence
Since the publication of the Warren Commission
Report in September 1964, critics have written about the
possibility that Silvia Duran was an intelligence agent
for either the Americans, Mexicans or Cubans.
1) Was Silvia Duran an agent, asset or source
for Mexican or American intelligence?
In an effort to resolve this question, the House
Select Committee on Assassinations reviewed the United
States investigative agencies' files on Silvia Duran. 752/
The Committee found no evidence in this file review that
Silvia Duran was either an American or Mexican intelli-
gence agent.
In addition, the Committee has interviewed most
of the Mexico City Station employees about the possibility.
Only David Phillips, Chief of Covert Action and the Cuban
Section in the Mexico City Station in 1963, a position
which made him very knowledgeable, considered that Duran
was possibly an agent or source. Mr. Phillips stated that
200031-1
Classification:
304
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 198
"at one time the agency pitched 753/ almost everyone
at the Cuban Embassy." 754/ Mr. Phillips stated that
he had first heard Duran's name from the telephone
intercept transcripts. 755/ But Mr. Phillips asserted
that the CIA had no interest in Ms. Duran because "she
wasn't friendly with anyone." 756/ Mr. Phillips had
previously mentioned the CIA Mexico City Station's in-
terest in recruiting a former Cuban Ambassador to Mexico
named Lechuga. 757/ Mr. Phillips was shown a memorandum
written by W. David Slawson of the Warren Commission staff
regarding a trip to Mexico by Warren Commission staff
members which said:
Mr. Scott's (Chief of the CIA Station in Mexi-
co City) narrative disclosed that the CIA's
action immediately after the assassination con-
sisted basically of alerting all its confiden-
tial sources of information throughout Mexico
to immediately channel all information into
their headquarters, and of compiling as com-
plete dossiers as possible on Oswald and every-
one else throughout Mexico who at that time
the CIA knew had had some contact with Oswald...
This meant especially Silvia Duran, who because
she had previously been having an affair with
Lechuga, the former Cuban Ambassador to Mexico
and presently the Cuban representative at the
United Nations, had previously been of substan-
tial interest to the CIA...758/
Mr. Phillips was surprised by this and stated
that "No one let me in on this operation." 759/ But
2000905
Classification:
305
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 199
been arrested. 694/ After Winston Scott's conversation
with John Scelso, Scott called Luis Echevarria and stated
that the Mexico City Station desired that all information
received from Duran be forwarded immediately to the Mexico
City Station, and that her arrest and statements not be
communicated to any leftist groups. 695/
On November 27, 1963, the Mexican government for-
warded to the Mexico City Station a copy of Silvia Duran's
ten-page signed statement. 696/ It said,
"Upon learning about the assassination
she and her husband speculated that Presi-
dent Kennedy might have been assassinated
for racial reasons. When she became aware
that the assassin was Lee Harvey Oswald, she
ascertained that it was the same man who ap-
proximately two months prior had been to the
Cuban Consulate to solicit an intransit visa
to Russia. Having taken his name from the
special documentation he presented she knew
that he was married to a Russian woman and
belonged to the "Fair Play for Cuba Committee."
She checked the data in the Consulate archives
and became certain that it was the same indi-
vidual who was blonde, short, dressed unelegant-
ly and whose face turned red when angry.
Consul had denied the visa because to obtain
an intransit visa from the Cuban government,
it was imperative that he previously obtain a
visa from the Soviet Consulate. Since obtain-
ing a visa from the Soviets took four months
and Oswald's Mexican visa expired soon Oswald
was advised that he see the Soviet Consul, and
calling the person in charge of that office.
The Soviet official told her that they would
have to consult Moscow which would take four
months. That afternoon, Oswald returned to the
Classification:
The
2000903
;
303
Classified by derivation:
4
Mr. Phillips added that he doubted that Duran would
have been pitched because the Station could not identify
any of her weaknesses. The Committee staff members then
told Mr. Phillips about the reporting on file concerning
Ms. Duran from one of the Station's penetration agents,
LITAMIL/9, at the Cuban Embassy. At one point LITAMIL/9
had reported to his case officer that all that would
have to be done to recruit Ms. Duran was to get a blonde,
blue-eyed American in bed with her. 761/ With this, Mr.
Phillips said that it did indeed sound as if the Station
had targeted Ms. Duran for recruitment, that the Station's
interest had been substantial, and that the weaknesses
and means had been identified. 762/ Mr. Phillips
pointed out, however, that because Duran had been targeted
did not necessarily mean that she had been pitched. 763/
In addition, he stated that he had never heard that Duran
had been pitched. 764/
Mr. Phillips did state that he would expect that
Ms. Duran's file at the CIA would be "very thick" because
of all the telephone intercepts that concerned her and
the substantial interest that the Station had in her. 765/
He stated that much of the material in her file should
predate the assassination. 766/ Mr. Phillips stated that
2000906
Classification:
306
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 200
he would be very surprised if Ms. Duran's 201 file was
small and contained only a few pre-assassination docu-
ments. 767/ This is in fact the case of the Headquarters
201 file. 768/ This Committee has asked the CIA to make
Ms. Duran's Mexican "P" 769/ (personality) file available
for review. The CIA informed the Committee that there
was no "P" file available on Ms. Duran. 770/
Another CIA employee, Dan Neiscuir, who worked on
an "Oswald Task Force" in late September or early October
of 1975 dealing with Freedom of Information Act law suits
brought against the Agency concerning the files on Lee
Harvey Oswald, stated that he believed that Ms. Duran may
have been a source of information for either the CIA or
the Mexicans. 771/ Mr. Neiscuir could not recall why he
specifically had this recollection, but thought that it
was due to something he had seen in Oswald's file. 772/
He said that it may have been the Agency's attempts to
protect Ms. Duran after the assassination and the heavy
cable traffic that those attempts generated that led him
to his inference that she was a source of information
for either the Agency or the Mexicans. 773/
Despite LIRING/3's case officer's asking LIRING/3
not to recontact Ms. Duran, Mr. Phillips' statements, and
2000907
Classification:
307
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 201
Mr. Neiscuir's hazy recollections, the Committee cannot
definitely resolve whether Silvia Duran was a Mexican or
American intelligence agent or source.
(2) was Silvia Duran a Cuban intelligence agent?
In an effort to resolve this question, the HSCA
reviewed the United States investigative agencies' files
on Silvia Duran. 774/ The Committee found no evidence in
the files that would indicate that Ms. Duran was associated
with Cuban intelligence.
In addition, the HSCA interviewed most of the Mexi-
co City Station employees about the possibility that Duran
worked for Cuban intelligence. Only Barney Hidalgo, a
CIA officer who travelled to Mexico City in 1963, considered
the possibility to be likely. 775/ Mr. Hidalgo, professing
not to remember all the details, stated that he thought
that Duran was a Cuban intelligence agent. 776/ Hidalgo
said:
At the time when this contact told me,of
Silvia Duran I tied the two together, yes,
sir. I don't know, how at that time it
was obvious to me as an intelligence agent
that there was some connection there but
it was of no interest whatsoever to me,
I do remember that when I next saw this
contact of mine I mentioned the fact to
him and let him proceed to do whatever he
Classification:
2000913
308
Classified by derivation:
Classification:
(This form is to be used for material extracted
from CIA-controlled documents.)
- 202
wanted to. 777/
Mr. Hidalgo further stated that he never resolved
the issue. 778/
With no corroborating evidence for Mr. Hidalgo's
memory, the Committee must conclude that Silvia Duran
was probably never employed by Cuban Intelligence.
B. The Cubans
1. Eusebio Azcue Lopez
When Lee Harvey Oswald allegedly visited the Cuban
Consulate, Eusebio Azcue Lopez, a Cuban citizen, was the
Cuban Consul. 779/ Because he had diplomatic immunity,
the Cuban government had never been asked to make him
available for questioning. 78