180-10083-10181
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
10/2/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER:
180-10083-10181
RECORD SERIES : NUMBERED FILES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 011343
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
VITATE, GUY
FROM:
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
PAGES:
09/01/1978
3
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
BAY OF PIGS
VITATE, GUY
VECIANA, ANΤΟΝΙΟ
CIA, STAFF
OUTSIDE CONTACT REPORT
Unclassified
3
Redact
11/14/1996
Box 205.
v9.1
1
NW 50955 DocId: 32250123
Page 1
1
Fonzi
KENNEDY
011307
OUTSIDE CONTACT REPORT
1.
Identifying Information:
Name
Guy Vitale
DATE 9/1/78
Telephone 305-323-5369
Address 107 N. Virginia Avenue, Sanford,Fla. 32771
Type of Contact:
☐☐ Telephone
X Person
11. Summary of Contact:
Guy Vitale is a retired employee of the Central Intelligence
Agency. He was interviewed relative to a possible association
with Antonio Veciana, as indicated by files review.
Vitale said that, following an assignment in Athens,
he returned to headquarters and was asked in about December,
1960, to take part in "The Project," as preparation for the
Bay of Pigs invasion was termed. His general assignment, he
said, was to "hand-hold WT operators." That, he said, meant
to act as a case agent for Cubans being trained in wireless
telegraph operations. He remained at headquarters in Washing-
ton for the first two or three weeks of this assignment
"handling cable traffic." He was then assigned to a secret.
training installation outside Washington to take charge of
a large group (more than 20) of Cubans. He described his job
as providing general orientation to them and then releasing
them to instructors in guerilla warfare and demolition.
Vitale said he had no contact with anyone in Miami prior
to the Bay of Pigs.
After the Bay of Pigs, he said, he was
detailed to go to a small island off Puerto Rico to gather up
what he termed "the remnants of the invasion" mostly
those Cubans who never made it to the beachhead. He took
these men back to Miami and turned them over to other Agency
personnel there. Vitale said his only other trip outside
Washington was prior to the Bay of Pigs. That was to New
Orleans, around March of 1961. He was assigned to take
three Cubans, whose names he does not recall, to New Orleans.
There he turned them over to personnel at a training camp
in Belle Chase, Louisiana. Following that, he was detailed
very briefly to Pass Christian, Mississippi, to handle a
NW 50955 DocId: 32250123 Page 2
-more-
2.
small group of Cubans who had gone AWOL from training.
His job was to re-group them and reinstill their confidence
for the up-coming invasion. That detail, he said, only
lasted a week or two.
Vitale said he never dealt with any politically important
Cubans. The only names he could recall offhand were Jerry
Prieto, "Magoo," Grillo and Bulsado. Mostly, he said, he
handled men trained as wireless telegraph operators who were
infiltrated into Cuba to act as communication links for
paramilitary groups.
After the Bay of Pigs, Vitale said, the Agency went to
what he termed the "single team concept." That, he explained,
meant that paramilitary groups were limited to a team of
five or six persons and each would have its own wireless
telegraph operator to be infiltrated into Cuba with the team.
Vitale said that the teams were run out of the Agency's
Miami station. "We just audited the records," he said.
His job, then, was as an assistant case officer and
intelligence analyst. The senior case officer was
Calvin Hicks. "Miami would send up the plans and Hicks
would evaluate them and pass them on for higher approval,"
Vitale said. "I did the leg work and paper work and things
like that."
Vitale said he had very little direct contact with personnel
at Miami's JM/WAVE station. "I had a lot of friends down
there from pre-Bay of Pigs days and I would visit them on
vacation," he said, "but I remember only one operational
trip down there, and that was to deliver some photographs."
He does not know what the photographs were of.
had
Vitale said he no dealings with E. Howard Hunt, Bernard Barker,
Frank Fiorini Sturgis, Doug Gupton, Manolo Ray, Luis Conte-Aguerra,
or Radio Swan.
Vitale said he does not recall the name of Antonio Veciana at
all. When shown a photograph of Veciana, he said he does not
recognize the man.
When told that Veciana was associated with
Alpha 66, he said: "I don't think that organization was ever
used by the CIA, according to my recollection. Perhaps some
of the individuals were, but not the organization."
Vitale also did not recognize the names of Olien, Pratchett
or Maurice Bishop. He said he has a good friend by the name
of Whitney Bishop who retired from the Agency about five years
ago and who, Vitale believes, was in communications. He met
him in Athens. When shown a sketch of Maurice Bishop, Vitale
said it does not look at all like his friend and that the
sketch does not remind him of anyone he ever knew or saw.
NW 50955 DocId:32250123 Page 3
-more-
3.
Asked about his relationship with the Special Affairs Staff,
Vitale said that was headed by Desmond Fitzgerald and that
the Paramilitary section in which he worked was a component
of the staff, although he had no contact himself with
Fitzgerald.
Vitale was also asked about his involvement with the
subversive machine program. He said that came about 1967
and it involved him being assigned to what he termed a
"machine run." He was assistant to a fellow whose name
he doesn't recall because it was only a very brief assignment.
It involved culling names from Agency reports from all over
the world and putting them on a programming card to be fed
into an IBM machine.
Asked about his involvement with the destruction of CS
documents, Vitale said that was part of his responsibility
as a records officer. The material destroyed, he said,
was evaluated by him and judged to be no longer useful.
It was, he said, just a matter of getting rid of overloaded
paperwork. The destruction was based on his own knowledge,
sometimes in consultation with the originator of the document.
Vitale said he was never asked to destroy any documents
for the purpose of covering up Agency involvement with an
operation.
no
Vitale said he had contact with any operations in the Florida
Keys and was not familiar with ZR Rifle. ("I believe that's
an African diograph," he said.)
Although Vitale said he knew David Phillips headed the Cuba
project, he never had any operation contact with him. "I
wouldn't have on my level," he said.
In his assignment in records keeping, Vitale said he never wAS
involved in any "super-secret" or "hip pocket" operations in
which records were falsified or deliberately not kept. He
said that, as far as he knows, the Agency files he was associated
with reflect actual operations as they were.
Generally, Vitale unsolicitedly expressed satisfaction with his
career in the CIA. He said: "There are two things I took with
me when I left the CIA that I want to hang on to, and that is
my secrecy oath and my pension. They also have a very good
medical plan."
Vitale had earlier been shown a letter from CIA Acting Director
Carlucci releasing him from his secrecy oath for the purposes
of the interview.
###
NW 50955
Doctam225012BY Page
