180-10147-10332
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 10/19/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER: 180-10110-10006
RECORD SERIES : SECURITY CLASSIFIED TESTIMONY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER 014720
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: HSCA
FROM: [Restricted]
TO: [Restricted]
TITLE: [Restricted]
DATE: 10/05/1978
PAGES: 169
SUBJECTS: CIA, ASSOCIATION WITH OSWALD
CIA, FILES
[Restricted]
MEXICO CITY
CIA, METHODOLOGY
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: Unclassified
RESTRICTIONS: 1A; 1B
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 01/01/2003
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS: Includes notes about CIA documents on Oswald and two duplicates of testimony in next two
folders. Box 3.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 1
1
ANGLETON DEPOSITION..
CIA DOCUMENTS..
#1904
CUBAN CONNECTION (W/ BELIN)
1934
CUBAN CONNECTION (W/ BELIN)
1963
TELEPNONE TRANSCRIPT 10/1/13 (OSWALD & KOSTIKOV)
1979
COLEMAN SLAWSON MEMO ABOUT O. BEING OBSERVED IN
OFF. OF SOU. MILITARY ATTACHE IN MEXICO CITY
1977 TELEGRAM FROM MEXICO STATION RE: PHOTOGRAPHIC
COVERAGE
2008 1/31/64 RE: O'S CONTACT IN MEXICO CITY
177
DESCRIPTION OF AMERICAN MALE ENTERING SOV. EMB.
2033 7/23/64 BY DOULEY RE: REPRODUCING MCMM PHOTO IN
WC. REPORT
179
HP RESPONSE TO MEXICO STATION 10/10/03 W/ CORRECT
DESC OF O
2144 CABLE 12/20/63 BY WHITTEN RE. WITHHOLDING INFO
ON THE DAY
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 2
#197 11/23/63 CABLE FROM MEXICO STATION TO HD
STATION UNABLE TO CAPTURE O'S VOICE
205 11/23/03 CABLE FROM MEX CITY TO DIR: SAYS O IS
SAME PERSON WHO CALLED SOU. EMB PRIOR TO
10/1/63
248 11/27/63 MEMO TO PAPICH: THAT THERE WAS CONTINUOUS
PHOTO COVERAGE
1879 5/5/64 THAT O WAS IN CONTACT W/ CALDERON,
PEREZ, RODRIGUEZ
1892 ALLEGATION THAT CALDERON WAS CONNECTED W/ CIA
1990 5/5/64 DEBRIEFING QUESTIONS FOR AMMUG
1898 5/6/64 FOLLOW QUES FOR AMMUG
1891 5/8/64 SWENGOIN'S SUMMARY OF MEETING W AMMUG
1929-30 TRANSMITTAL OF AMMUG INFO TO WC
1931-33 ACTUAL INFO PROVIDED BY AMMUS: NO REF TO CALDERON
1907 5/14/64 BRIEF FOR PRESENTATION TO COMMISSION
1904 ANGLETON ON TRANSMITTAL OF INFO TO WC
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 3
5/23/75
1950-54 ISSUE OF CALDERON'S POSSIBLE FOREKNOWLEDGE
1928 MATERIAL FROM MEXICO STATION SHOWN TO WC
NO REF TO CALDERON
1977 CABLE: MANN WANTED CALDERON ARRESTED
2088 CALDERON ET AL: REQUEST THAT NO ACTION BE
TAKEN W/O AGENCY CLEARANCE
2020 11/26/63 CABLE: O + ARNESTO RODRIGUEZ
1957-59 ELENA DE PAZ ALLEGATION
2055 [6/5/64] POSSIBILITY OF KOB TRAINING SCHOOL IN
MINSK
796 10/31/59 STATE DEPT DOC ON O. ATTEMPTING TO RE-
NOUNCE CITIZENSHIP
W.C. #917 NAVAL MESSAGE: THAT O. OFFERED TO FURNISH RADAR
SECRETS TO SOVIETS
943 OSWALD FILE CARDS
2139 5/5/64 ANGLETON ON TRANSMITTAL OF MATERIALS TO WC
2138 5/12/64 ANGLETON TO ROCCA
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 4
SECRET
Stenographic Transcript Of
HEARINGS
Before The
SUBCOMMITTEE ON JOHN F. KENNEDY
SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ASSASSINATION OF JOHN F. KENNEDY
0 14720
NATIONAL SECURITY INFORMATION
Unauthorized Disclosure
Subject to Criminal Sanctions
Washington, D.C.
October 5, 1978
Alderson Reporting Company, Inc.
Official Reporters
300 Seventh St., S. W. Washington, D. C.
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 5
554-2345
TABLE OF CONTENTS
House of Representatives Washington, D. C.
Select Committee on Assassinations
Subcommittee on John F. Kennedy October 5,1978
TESTIMONY OF: PAGE
Mr. James Angleton 2
***
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY. INC.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 6
ASSASSINATION OF JOHN F. KENNEDY
Thursday, October 5, 1978
U. S. House of Representatives,
John F. Kennedy Subcommittee of
Select Committee on Assassinations,
Washington, D. C.
Deposition of: JAMES ANGLETON
called for examination by staff counsel for the Subcommittee,
pursuant to notice, in the offices of the Select Committee on
Assassinations, House Office Building Annex II, Room 3369,
Second and D. Streets, Southwest, Washington, D. C., beginning
at 10:00 o'clock a.m., before Albert Joseph LaFrance, a Notary
Public in and for the District of Columbia, when were present
on behalf of the respective parties:
For the Subcommittee:
MICHAEL GOLDSMITH, Staff Counsel
SURELL BRADY, Staff Counsel
CHARLES BERK, Staff Counsel
MARGO JACKSON, Researcher
For the Deponent:
WALLACE DUNCAN and PHILIP L. CHABOT, JR.
of the firm of Duncan, Brown, Weinberg & Palmer, P.C.,
1775 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.w.., Washington, D.C. 20006
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 7
PROCEEDINGS
TESTIMONY OF JAMES ANGLETON
Miss Brady. Let the record reflect that present this
morning for the deposition is the witness, James Angleton, who
has been administered an oath by the reporter, Albert Joseph
LaFrance empowered under the laws of the District of Columbia
to administer oaths.
Present for the deposition is Miss Surell Brady, counsel
for the Select Committee on Assassinations, Michael Goldsmith,
also counsel for the Select Committee on Assassinations,
and Margo Jackson, Research for the Select Committee on
Assassinations.
At this time, will counsel for Mr. Angleton identify
themselves?
Mr. Duncan. Wallace Duncan of Duncan, Brown, Weinberg
and Palmer, and Philip L. Chabot of the same firm.
Miss Brady. Let the record reflect that I have been
designated by the Select Committee on Assassinations of the
House of Representatives, pursuant to House Resolution 222 and
Committee Rule 4to depose witnesses for the Committee.
Mr. Angleton, is this correct that you are appearing here
voluntarily?
Mr. Angleton. That is correct.
Miss Brady. You have been advised of your right to
counsel and have selected counsel of your choice, is that
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 8
correct?
Mr. Angleton. Yes, but I would like to explain later why
I chose counsel.
Miss Brady. You may do so at this time, if you wish.
Mr. Angleton. I chose counsel simply because of the
surprise witness John Hart, that I was not notified in advance
of his appearance either by the Agency or by the Committee.
It seemed to me that lack of notification of a surprise witness
of this sort changed the whole context of what I regard this
inquiry to be. Therefore, having had the experience with the
Church Committee and not having had counsel in giving deposi-
tions and all of that and not having the right of discovery
during the course of the Church Committee hearings you might
say I learned a lesson.
Miss Brady. Your comments will be noted in the record.
Mr. Angleton, at this time, are you under any restriction
or privilege that would prevent you from answering all ques-
tions fully and accurately and without any intent to withhold
information?
Mr. Angleton. As far as I know, if I understand the
correspondence between the Chairman of the Committee and
Admiral Turner, CIA, there are no restrictions although the
cover letters signed by the Deputy director Carlucci stated
if I had any question I was to refer them to Mr. Breckinridge.
Miss Brady. Have you consulted with Mr. Breckinridge
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 9
or the Agency about your appearance today?
Mr. Angleton. I consulted with him as to certain docu-
ments which I wish to see as it affected Mr. Hart's appearance.
That was the General Counsel's office through my attorneys.
Miss Brady. Have you also been provided with a copy of
the Committee's Rules and have you and your attorney had time
to peruse those rules?
Mr. Angleton. I haven't perused them but I don't need
to. I read them sometime ago. I have not really seen them for
the last month.
Mr. Duncan. His counsel are familiar with the rules.
Miss Brady. Mr. Angleton, also the Committee Rules
provide that at the end of the deposition the witness may be
furnished a copy of that transcript. As you are aware, much
of the information you will be dealing with this morning will
contain classified information to some extent. We are asking
if you will waive your right to have an actual copy of the
transcript but of course it will be available to you and your
attorneys at the Committee for your views.
Mr. Angleton. Can I reserve until we finish this session
as to whether I want a transcript or not?
Miss Brady. Certainly.
Mr. Angleton. Since I don't know what we are going to go
into.
Miss Brady. That is fine.
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 10
Mr. Angleton, first I would like to go into the background
of the Nosenko case. Can you tell me what position you held
with the Central Intelligence Agency in 1961?
Mr. Angleton. I was Chief of Counterintelligence.
Miss Brady. When did you first become involved in the
Nosenko case?
Mr. Angleton. I can't give you the exact dates but it
was when the first telegram arrived from Geneva that he had
contacted our people through an American diplomat.
Miss Brady. Which individual in Geneva did Mr. Nosenko
first contact in 1962?
Mr. Angleton. It was David -- the name will come back --
David somebody in the State Department who had previously been
stationed in Moscow.
Miss Brady. Do you know what the person's assignment
was?
Mr. Angleton. He was a part of the American delegation.
You mean the person being the American diplomat? He was a
member of the American delegation to the UN Conference or
whatever it was.
Miss Brady. In Geneva?
Mr. Angleton. In Geneva.
Miss Brady. When did word of Nosenko's first contact
first reach the Counterintelligence Staff at Headquarters?
Mr. Angleton. Almost immediately.
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 11
Miss Brady. Through whom was that communication made?
Mr. Angleton. Through the Agency.
Miss Brady. Was that through a cable or what type of
communication.
Mr. Angleton. Telegram.
Miss Brady. Which division within the Agency was respon-
sible for the case at the time of the first contact?
Mr. Angleton. The Soviet Division.
Miss Brady. What was the role of the Counterintelligence
Staff?
Mr. Angleton. The Counterintelligence Staff is the
principal counterintelligence advisor to the Director.
Miss Brady. Was it normal for Counterintelligence to
handle defectors? Had they handled any defectors previously?
Mr. Angleton. Yes, we had handled a Hay Hannen, who
had been previously handled by others unsuccessfully and had
been turned over to Counterintelligence Staff and it was
through him that Colonel Abel was apprehended.
Miss Brady. Was it normal procedure then for the defector
cases to initially go through the Soviet Division and only to
Counterintelligence if problems developed? Was that the
procedure?
Mr. Angleton. No, there is no procedure. It is a ques-
tion of precisely how the events transpire. I can take up much
more in detail when we come to the person to whom Hart referred
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 12
to as "X". But in short, we did not have jurisdiction over
Nosenko, then or any other time.
Miss Brady. What role were you playing? Were you in a
consulting role at that time? How was information about the
case disseminated to you individually?
Mr. Angleton. It was not unusual in cases that dealt
with Soviet intelligence that copies of the telegram would be
sent to us automatically.
Miss Brady. What action was taken by the Agency after
Nosenko was first contacted?
Mr. Angleton. There was no action taken. There was
great excitement. The first thing that one does in those
cases is to begin to run tracers against the registry and
files to see if there is any previous knowledge of the indi-
vidual.
Second was to consider the information which he submitted
in terms of file and tracers.
Miss Brady. What significant information was provided by
Nosenko at that time of the first contact?
Mr. Angleton. I have not seen those telegrams, I might
add, for several years but one of the more astonishing pieces
of information which he gave was to the effect that a Soviet
by the name of Belitsky, who was in contact with the Agency
was in fact a plant. He gave the name of our case officers
quite accurately who were handling Blitsky. He stated that
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 13
Belitsky was an agent of the Department of Disinformation.
Miss Brady. Within the KGB?
Mr. Angleton. Within the KGB.
Miss Brady. Was that the first allegation you had of a
serious Soviet penetration by the KGB?
Mr. Angleton. From whom? I am afraid I don't understand
your question.
Miss Brady. Was that the first information you had had
either through your own intelligence or through any other
Soviet defector of a possible serious Soviet penetration?
Mr. Angleton. We had had hundreds of them, allegations.
Miss Brady. How would you characterize this allegation by
Nosenko. Was it more serious? Was it more substantive?
Mr. Angleton. The facts were, to explain this it is
a complex case, as you will find out all of these cases are,
they cannot be simply explained in a few words -- Belitsky
was a person connected with the media in the Soviet Union who
traveled extensively in the West and who had in fact attempted
in our view to be recruited by another allied intelligence
service. Eventually he fell into the hands of the CIA or the
Soviet Division who believed that they had made a firm recruit-
ment of this individual and therefore, for a great period of
time, I don't know how many years, they were in fact running
him as an agent.
He would travel to and from Moscow to the West. Therefore,
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 14
from that point of view, to have it declared that their
case officers whose names were given accurately by Nosenko
were in contact with a control agent of the KGB, particularly
the Department of Disinformation, they regarded that as an
enormous discovery. But when we got that trace and began to
analyze it we found the following:
Miss Brady. Excuse me. When you say we are you refer-
ring to Counterintelligence?
Mr. Angleton. I am talking about Counterintelligence.
We found that the Foreign Service, whose favor Belitsky
had curried at one time, had put him under surveillance and
a number of other things while he was in their capitol. They
came to the conclusion that he was in fact what we would call
coat dragging, he was trying to be recruited. Therefore,
they wouldn't have anything to do with him on the grounds
that he was a suspected plant. So that was found in the files.
Second, we had information -- I will put it another way --
when we had "X" in a safe house there was some kind of
entry made into his personal papers and we found, not the
Counterintelligence but either the Office of Security or the
Soviet Division found, on some notes that he had made
apparently he was jotting down things to talk about -- and on
that he had the name Belitsky; in other words, the files showed
that had any analyst gone to Belitsky and so on that this was
not startling news because here was, number one, a Foreign
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 15
Service two or three years prior to that having given us a
full report on Belitsky as a suspected provocateur.
At the same time, we had in our possession information
from "X" that Blitsky was a plant.
Miss Brady. Based on that information, what conclusions
were you able to draw from Nosenko in terms of his giving this
information as a startling revelation?
Mr. Angleton. We drew no conclusions. I gave you only
one piece of information that I can recall. It stands out
because he also gave, I believe, the alias of Belitsky.
Now, I would like to have seen the telegrams that came in at
that period because when he had met our people there, Bagley
and whoever it was, he had made the statement that he would
only give them three or four pieces of information in return
for about $200 or so, and that was a one time affair. That
was his original approach, and he needed that money in order
to make up his deficit of what he had been using in drinking.
So, he gave other pieces of information, which may come
back to my memory, but at the moment, as I recall, they were
not the most startling in the world. Nevertheless, that is not
the basic point. The basic point was that the information
which I have just described on Belitsky would have made an
enormous impact on someone in Bagley's position if he was
unaware of the file checks.
Miss Brady. You have mentioned the testimony of John
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 16
Hart. I take it therefore you are familiar with the transcript
of that testimony?
Mr. Angleton. I am indeed.
Miss Brady. Are you also familiar with Mr. Hart's alle-
gations or assertions that at the time of Nosenko's first
interviews in Geneva, in an effort to sooth himself and calm
himself he had been drinking heavily and admitted later to
case officers he was drunk in the earlier interrogation?
Mr. Angleton. I am familiar with it and I regard it
as part and parcel of the Hart myth.
Miss Brady. What other information do you have on that
bearing on what the condition of Hart was at the time of the
first interviews?
Mr. Angleton. I happen to know that there was some
drinking being done. My own feeling is that the CIA people
were doing as much, if not more, drinking than Nosenko.
Miss Brady. Were there ever any reports, telegrams or
other type of information from those persons interviewing
him that he was in fact drunk.
Mr. Angleton. There may have been some description,
operational description, that he had been in some bars or
something of that sort. There may have been. You see, I have
to say to you that for many years, after I left the Agency, I
have not left Counterintelligence. So, I see my friends and
we still go over a lot of the same points and so on because we
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 17
have this unhappy choice of leadership in the Counterintelli-
gence and in the Agency.
So that when I make some of these comments they are com-
ments that may not have been known to me at the time of my
activity but which I have learned subsequently.
Miss Brady. Is your lasting impression of Nosenko's first
contact that he was unstable or in any way unable to give
accurate information?
Mr. Angleton. If you have been 31 years in Counterintel-
ligence you don't draw any kind of inference at all. Conclu-
sions are the last thing you make based on a one time walk-in
who is only asking for $200.
There is a certain unreal air, to begin with, that a man
whose father was a Minister of the Soviet Union, to whom they
had erected a statue as a hero of the Soviet Union, would have
degenerated to the point that he would be willing to betray
his country for $200 in exchange for four pieces of informa-
tion.
In other words, there is an unreal aspect to that which
is illogical because he knows the trade, he could have asked
for several thousands of dollars for one piece of information,
if he liked to drink and have girlfriends and all that type
of thing, the thing simply doesn't jibe.
Miss Brady. What other factors about the circumstances
of his contact would you say had an air of unreality?
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 18
Mr. Angleton. Because he alleged to be from the Second
Chief Directorate and the primary concerns of the Second Chief
Directorate of the KGB are domestic, the same as the FBI.
Therefore, if he was going to be in Geneva it was illogical
up to a certain extent because there is what is called the
"SK" or the security part of the First Chief Directorate, CIA
part, who would normally be occupying that position.
Miss Brady. At that time was Nosenko challenged or
questioned about any of these circumstances about his contact?
Mr. Angleton. I think in all honesty that Pete Bagley
was so taken up by the Belitsky and other leads, other
information imparted, that his basic concern was to break down
this man or at least to induce this man to remain in contact
with a view to future recruitment; therefore not to get three
or four pieces of information but to get a lot of information
and to offer him all kinds of inducements so that there would
be a permanent relationship.
But in this sense it stood to reason that if a man was
prepared to sell himself for $300 or $200 or whatnot, that you
would have leverage over him in the ultimate if you desired
to use such leverage, that he would have no options but to work
for you.
Miss Brady. Was Bagley the case officer assigned to
Nosenko at that time?
Mr. Angleton. He was stationed in Switzerland and he was
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 19
a good Soviet expert.
Miss Brady. Within the Soviet Division?
Mr. Angleton. I don't know whether he depended directly
on them or whether he depended on the Western European Divi-
sion, but he knew several languages and had studied in Geneva
and was a part of our mission.
Miss Brady. Was any of the information or lead provided
by Nosenko at that time given to another source to evaluate?
Mr. Angleton. I will put it this way. When Pete came
back, I permitted him to read hundreds and hundreds of pages
of transcript from "X".
Miss Brady. At this time could we identify "X" for the
record?
Mr. Angleton. Anatole Golitzen. I can't give you dates
or anything but he was absolutely shocked when he read this
information.
Miss Brady. What was the basis for his surprise or shock?
Mr. Angleton. Because he was unaware of it. Now, I
might add, we have one missing point here. Before he came
back I had sent a long telegram, a questionnaire, to Geneva,
for which I drew heavily upon "X's" information, because, to
use a word I sort of invented in the business and I don't like
to have folks around know where it came from but I always
believed in using "litmus paper", in other words, having a
fact not known, that the other side does not know we know.
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 20
So that in the course of elicitation that thing is exposed
to an individual and he is unaware of the fact that we do know
the whole story, say, on that particular matter.
Now, if he is in a position where he had had access and
knows that and withholds it from you, it is an indicator,
because, after all, a defection is a change of allegiance.
Further than that, a person who defects has to transfer his
sense of security and everything to the other people. He has
to tell you about penetrations in your organization and all of
the troubles of your organization in his own defense because
he could be assassinated by somebody within your own organiza-
tion. Therefore, it is in his self interest to expose every-
thing.
So that this was a very long telegram, which I again have
not seen since practically that day, you might say, in which
I spent many hours pulling together those questions for them
to submit to Nosenko. To this day I don't know whether those
questions were submitted. I can't recall them. I mean,
whether he left before they got the telegram or not, I don't
know.
But I did not tell them that it came from "X", as I
recall. It only simply stated as a follow-up in his position
as Second Chief Directorate "will you please take up
the following names". There was no explanation. "Will you
take this up. Have you ever heard of this? Have you ever
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 21
heard of that." And so on.
I can't recall, there may have been responses in all of
that. In my time frame it is all telescoped down to Pete's
return. So, to go back to your question as to whether this
was taken up with any other source, hte logical thought that
occurred to me was that since Golitzen was the first defector
who had ever given us in any department had the order of
battle of the Second Chief Directorate, that he would be the
logical man to turn to for evaluation.
This was put up to Mr. Helms and Mr. Helms -- the deci-
sion was that he would never wish to disclose the name or
circumstances or the fact that we had been approached at that
given time and moment by this defector. So we resorted to
another device, and we took a page out of the chapter of the
operation in which for some months, if not years, a member of
the Eastern Bloc intelligence communicated to us through an
Embassy anonymously, and therefore we took the information,
basic information, that was given by Nosenko and we disguised
it as though it was an anonymous letter sent to us, and we
showed that anonymous letter to Golitzin, who read the infor-
mation and who stated this is disinformation, this is a provo-
cation.
Miss Brady. What was Golitzin's status with the Agency
at that time?
Mr. Angleton. His status with the Agency was a defector
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 22
who had supplied several thousands of pages of very hard core
information which had resulted in perhaps the most major
counterespionage cases in this country, I mean in the whole
Western world.
Miss Brady. At the time of Golitzin's defection, did he
give any indication of what he expected the KGB reaction to
be to his defection?
Mr. Angleton. Exactly. He said that when he defected --
I mean at some given stage, and again I can't tell you the
exact dates on this -- let me put it this way: He defected
in Helsinki. We sent him on to Sweden and put him on an air-
plane with his wife and child with a view of a direct flight
to the United States. Either through bad weather or for
reasons I do not know his plane was diverted to Germany. He
had warned our man in Helsinki that there was a penetration of
the Agency.
Miss Brady. Was he able to identify it any more than
that?
Mr. Angleton. No, he just said "you have to be very
careful how you treat my information because there is a pene-
tration." Now, our station man in my view committed a terrible
error in giving a very brief, excitable summary of the infor-
mation disclosed by Golitzin which he was able to derive in
that short period of time. He included this allegation of
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 23
penetration whereas anyone more mature would know that you do
not send that type of information through a cable where dozens
of copies are going to be made and disseminated to various
desks. It is the type of thing that you would have almost
traveled home with the agent and reported to the Director.
But that was not done and it was paragraph 7 in the cable that
had this statement that the source states we must be extremely
careful and he is fearful because there is a penetration in
the Agency.
So, that was all that he told our man. He gave him a
warning in order for him to be careful and how he handled
whatever he did send back about him.
As I recall, Golitzin was supposed to have met a delega-
tion coming in from Moscow at the airport at the time we were
putting him on the plane and sending him on to Stockholm, so
we knew the alarm would be immediate. So, when the plane
was diverted -- and I might also add that I don't think his
wife and child had ever flown before or anything but they
were terribly ill, and I don't think she knew anything about
the defection until about the last minute, and she had
relatives behind in the Soviet Union, so there were a lot of
emotional problems -- so when the plane was diverted to
Germany his suspicions were immediately that something was up
and therefore he began to fear for himself, because this was
not in accordance with the understanding. It was supposed to
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 24
be a direct flight to the United States.
Therefore, when he arrived in Germany he did what he
would not have done under other circumstances. He warned our
people in Germany that the agent to which he was referring
about the penetration had operated in Germany. Since the
person was a Russian speaker and of Russian origin, in fact
born in Russia, it would be logical that the Agency would put
him in contact or use as a handle that very man who could
assassinate him since he was one of the number one Russian
experts.
Not knowing this at all, he had all the suspicions in the
world of that diversion. So, it entailed his disclosing to us
or to the German station a great deal of information regarding
that agent.
Miss Brady. Did he identify the agent?
Mr. Angleton. Only by cryptonym.
Miss Brady. What was the cryptonym.
Mr. Angleton. Sasha, S-a-s-h-a.
Miss Brady. Was the agency able through that cryptonym
to actually identify that person?
Mr. Angleton. Eventually. I will go into that if you
would like.
Miss Brady. All right.
Mr. Angleton. First I want to get him back to the United
States. He is stranded here in Germany.
So, he arrived with his family and was put up in a safe-
house. In the meantime the very night that some of these
cables came in, the Deputy Chief of the Soviet Division was
Mr. Howard Osborn, later our Director of Security, and he came
rushing to my home with the telegram that had arrived at night,
NW 50955 DocId:32263411 Page 25
as I recall, therefore he got in touch with me. We spent some
time discussing it with a view of implications and all those
things you want to have in mind before the opening of business
next day.
I will now digress on Sasha, under the charter or under
the regulations of the Agency all matters dealing with CIA
personnel are strictly jurisdictional matters of the Director
of Security. In other words, the security investigations of
personnel, their security files as distinguished from personnel
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 26
files, the polygraph, the investigations of applicants, the
periodic reexamination of personnel, the periodic repoly-
graphing of personnel, allegations regarding personnel,
employees, et cetera, are strictly within the sole jurisdic-
tion of the Director of Security. That also includes physical
installations and so on.
So that they would be obviously the first party to whom
one would turn with an allegation regarding penetration and they
would have under all circumstances the right of direct contact
with the source because they alone would have the files from
which they could analyze gathered information for interroga-
tion and followup, et cetera, description or any small item of
information that might lead to identification.
Now Golitzen's story basically was this that he had
been on the Emigre Desk in the First Chief Directorate of
Soviet Intelligence and the file of this agent, Sasha, had
been transferred at a given time, I think it was 1951 or there-
abouts, had been transferred to the American Department and
that he had a chance to look at that file and they knew that
the individual's name ended in "insky" or something of that
sort, and that agent had come back into Russia at one stage
while in Germany to see his parents.
Miss Brady. What do you mean by coming back?
Mr. Angleton. That means that unbeknownst to anybody,
say, he might have walked down a street in Berlin, walked
NW 50955 DocId: 32263411 Page 27
in a house, out the back entrance, changed clothes, identity,
disguise or what not, been put on a plane, flown there, and then
redeposited in West Berlin, and no one would ever have known
that he spent a week in Moscow. In other words, he had a cover
story that he was on vacation or sick and so on. It means any
kind of covered travel,