180-10131-10327
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date: 10/19/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER: 180-10131-10327
RECORD SERIES: SECURITY CLASSIFIED TESTIMONY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 014726
Document Information
ORIGINATOR: PHILLIPS, DAVID ATLEE
FROM: HSCA
TO: 
TITLE: 
DATE: 04/25/1978
PAGES: 105
SUBJECTS: ...DESCRIPTION
CIA, METHODOLOGY
PHILLIPS, DAVID A., TESTIMONY BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
OSWALD, LEE, POST RUSSIAN PERIOD, INDENTIFICATION
AND...
OSWALD, LEE, POST RUSSIAN PERIOD, TRAVEL, TRIP TO
MEXICO
DURAN, SYLVIA
DOCUMENT TYPE: TRANSCRIPT
CLASSIFICATION: Secret
RESTRICTIONS: 1A; IB
CURRENT STATUS: Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW: 01/01/2003
OPENING CRITERIA: Box 5
COMMENTS: 

SECRET
Stenographic Transcript Of
HEARINGS
Before The
Executive Session
SELECT COMMITTEE ON ASSASSINATIONS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Tuesday, April 25, 1978
Witness - David Atlee Phillips
Washington, D.C.
Alderson Reporting Company, Inc.
Official Reporters
300 Seventh St., S. W. Washington, D. C.
50955 DocId: 32277212 Page 2
554-2345 SECRET
000802
SECRET
House of Representatives
Subcommittee on the Assassination of John F. Kennedy
of the Select Committee on Assassinations
Washington, D.C.
Tuesday, April 25, 1978
Page
3
Testimony of David Atlee Phillips
300 7TH STREET, S.W. REPORTERS BUILDING, WASHINGTON, D.C. 20024 (202) 554-2345
SECRET
EXECUTIVE SESSION
1
SHORT
TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 1978
House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Assassina-
tion of John F. Kennedy of
the Select Committee on
Assassinations,
Washington, D. C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:05 a.m.,
in room 2200, Rayburn House Office Building, the Hon. Richardson
Preyer (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Preyer, Dodd and Devine.
Staff Members Present: M. Goldsmith, E. Berning,
D. Hardway, J. Blackmer, W. Triplett, E. Lopez and G. Fonzi..
Mr. Preyer. The committee will resume its hearing.
Mr. Phillips, thank you for being here today. I know
that it was an inconvenience to you and we appreciate your
working out your schedule so you could be here.
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir.
Mr. Preyer. We will ask you to be sworn, sir.
Do you solemnly swear that the evidence you will give to
the committee will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Mr. Phillips. I do.
SECRET
000803
50955 DocId: 32277212 Page 4
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
INDEX
SECRET
TESTIMONY OF DAVID ATLEE PHILLIPS
Mr. Preyer. Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
I believe you have been given a copy of the rules of the
committee.
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir, I have.
Mr. Preyer. At this time I will give a brief statement
concerning the subject of the investigation which we give to
every witness.
House Resolution 222 mandates the committee to conduct
a full and complete investigation and study of the circum-
stances surrounding the assassination and death of President
John F. Kennedy in determining whether the existing laws of
the United States concerning the protection of the President
and the investigatory jurisdiction and capability of agencies
306 7TH STREET, S.W. SEFORTERS BUILDING, WASHINGTON, D. C. 20024 (202) 554-2345
and departments are adequate in their provisions and enforce-
ment and whether there was full disclosure of evidence and
information among the agencies and departments of the United
States Government and whether any evidence or information not
in the possession of an agency or department would have been
of assistance in investigating the assassination and why such
information was not provided or collected by that agency or
department and to make recommendations to the House if the
Select Committee deems it appropriate for the amendment of
existing legislation and the enactment of new legislation.
The Chair will recognize Mr. Goldsmith for the beginning
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 5
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000805
SECRET
of the questioning..
Mr. Goldsmith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Phillips, for the record would you state your full
name and address, please.
Mr. Phillips. David Atlee Phillips, 8224 Stone Trail
Drive, Bethesda, Maryland, 20034.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Phillips, are you a former employee
of the CIA?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I am.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would you give the committee a summary
of the positions that you held while you were at the agency?
Mr. Phillips. I was recruited by the CIA as a part time
assistant in 1950 in Chile where I was a newspaperman. I
continued in that capacity for some four years and became a
full time intelligence officer in 1954 when I was in Guatemala.
In 1955 and 1956 I was in Cuba.
In 1957 and 1958 I was in Lebanon.
In 1959 and 1960 I was in Cuba again.
During the remainder of 1960 and 1961 I was in the
Washington task force which worked on the Bay of Pigs opera-
tion.
In late 1961 I was assigned to Mexico City.
In early 1965 I became the Chief of Station in Santo
Domingo in the Dominican Republic.
I returned to Washington in 1967 and became the Chief of
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000806
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 6.
SECRET
Cuban Operations for the CIA through 1969.
In 1970 I was the Chief of Station in Rio de Janeiro and
then the capital was changed and I moved with my office to
Brazilia.
In 1971 I went to Venezuela where I was Chief of Station.
In mid 1973 I was returned to Washington to become the
Chief of the Western Hemisphere Division of the CIA.
Mr. Goldsmith. When did you retire from the agency?
Mr. Phillips. On the 9th of May 1975.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you affiliated with the Retired
Intelligence Officers Association?
Mr. Phillips. Yes. I am the founder of that organiza-
tion.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you the president of that organiza-
tion?
Mr. Phillips. I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith. Are you presently the president of that
organization?
Mr. Phillips. No, I am not the president. I am a member
of the board of directors.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would you explain to the committee what
the purpose of that association is?
Mr. Phillips. In 1975 I was personally concerned about
what I thought was happening to the U.S. intelligence
community. The clandestine operator is perhaps the only
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000807
NW 50955 DocId: 32277212 Page 7
SECRET
American that does not have a constituency and so I decided
to form an organization of former intelligence men and women
from all services to try to play some sort of constructive
role in the deliberations of intelligence in the future.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Phillips, have you spoken to anyone
at the agency in reference to your testimony today?
Mr. Phillips. Have I spoken about my testimony today
with anyone at the agency? One person, Mr. Robert Shaw,
because before I knew I was going to be asked here we had
plans to have lunch together and I told him that I had been
asked to come down here and we decided that we would not have
on the agenda any discussion of what we talk about down here
and we did not.
Mr. Goldsmith. So you in no way discussed what you
thought might have been the substance of your testimony here
today?.
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely not.
Mr. Goldsmith. And other than Mr. Shaw there was no one
at the agency that you spoke to in reference to your testimony?
Mr. Phillips. No.
Mr. Goldsmith. At this time I would ask the clerk to
show Mr. Phillips Exhibit 94. This is a letter from the
Acting Director of this committee to the chairman of this
committee. Would you please read that exhibit.
Mr. Phillips. Yes.
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000808
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 8
SECRET
Mr. Goldsmith. You have read the letter?
Mr. Phillips. I have, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith. And do you understand the letter?
Mr. Phillips. I understand it. It gives me complete
freedom to discuss things despite my secrecy with the agency.
Mr. Goldsmith. So that you would be obliged to testify
fully and truthfully before this committee.
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Phillips, is it true that it is
agency policy for case officers, for example, to have
pseudonyms?
Mr. Phillips. Yes. Of course all case officers have
a pseudonym.
Mr. Goldsmith. Will you explain to the committee what
the purpose of that pseudonym would be?
Mr. Phillips. A pseudonym is used so that on records
such as pay papers, all sorts of records that go back and
forth in a pouch in cable traffic you can refer to a person
without actually using his true name. It is a registered
thing that a person keeps throughout his career unless for
some reason it is blown, unless it becomes known publicly,
in which case the pseudonym is changed.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would the pseudonym also be used by a
case officer when the case officer contacts an agent?
Mr. Phillips. Very rarely. I don't know that anyone
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPA
000809
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 9
SECRET
ever did it. Case officers would not use a pseudonym. A
pseudonym is always a first name, a middle initial and a last
name. A pseudonym can be Jim Smith.
Mr. Goldsmith. So you would distinguish between a
pseudonym and an operational alias, is that correct?
Mr. Phillips. Absolutely.
Mr. Goldsmith. What was your pseudonym while you were
at the agency?
Mr. Phillips. I have two. My last one was Michael C.
Choaden.
Mr. Goldsmith. And what was your earlier one?
Mr. Phillips. Paul D. Langevin.
Mr. Goldsmith. When did you assume the second one, if
you recall?
Mr. Phillips. Oh, I am going to take a stab at this.
I don't really recall.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine. Do you recall which operational
aliases you have used in the past?
Mr. Phillips. No, because I would guess that in 25 years
that I may have used 200 or a hundred, say.
Mr. Goldsmith. Would it be agency policy for an opera-
tional alias to be registered?
Mr. Phillips. Not necessarily formally. A pseudonym,
yes, is registered and you push the buttons and it comes out
of a machine. An alias might just go in the files, it might
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000810
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 10
SECRET
not necessarily be registered formally.
Mr. Goldsmith. In which files would an alias go into?
Mr. Phillips. In the operational files. An officer
might use an alias on a one time basis and use the name Jim
Smith on a one time basis and it would only be in that one
file. Some officers have a habit of using an alias over a
period of time because it is something that they can remember.
I remember that I had one alias I used on more than one occa-
sion which was the first name of one of my good friends in high
school and the last name of one of my good friends in high
school so that I could remember.
Mr. Goldsmith. So your testimony then is that the agency
does not have essentially a registered index of operational
aliases, is that correct?
Mr. Phillips. If they do, I was not aware of it.
Mr. Goldsmith. And your testimony would be that to the
extent that there was any record of these aliases it would be
in the files. By files do you mean files that were located in
the local station or at headquarters?
Mr. Phillips. Both. I think I should make it clear that
in the cases of aliases used by foreigners that probably those
aliases go into a central file. AKA, also known as, and there
might be a number but in the case of American staff officers
it might be in the file in the station, it might be in a file
at the headquarters because the paper was duplicated. It might
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPA
000811
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 11
SECRET
be in both places.
Mr. Goldsmith. Mr. Phillips, did you previously give
testimony before this committee?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I did.
Mr. Goldsmith. Was that in November? November 27, 1976?
Mr. Phillips. The formal testimony before the chairman
I believe was on a Saturday. I am not sure of the date. I
also talked to the staff the day before. I remember it was
the Thanksgiving holidays.
Mr. Goldsmith. Was that in 1976?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, it was.
Mr. Goldsmith. For purposes of review I would like to
go over with you and with the committee the substance of your
testimony that day.
First you gave testimony pertaining to the nature of the
CIA's Mexico City station's surveillance and operations
against the Soviet and Cuban embassies and consulates specif-
ically with regard to their photo surveillance operation and
the wiretapping operations. Do you recall giving testimony
to this effect?
Mr. Phillips. I did to the extent that I was aware of
the details but certainly I didn't talk about it.
Mr. Goldsmith. Understood. And at that time you also
gave testimony regarding the procedures for delivering tapes
from the outside surveillance unit to the Mexico City station,
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000812
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 12
SECRET
for getting tapes transcribed, for erasing and reusing tapes,
for dealing with conversations of special interests, for
routing transcripts of conversations contained on the tapes
to appropriate officers at the Mexico City station. Do you
recall giving testimony to this effect?
Mr. Phillips. I do, to the degree that I knew the
detail, and I recall at the same time that I gave the names
of persons who knew better than I what the details were, yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine. At that time you also gave testi-
mony regarding the criteria that is applied for when an
intercepted conversation was considered sufficiently important
to warrant sending a cable to Washington, D. C.
Mr. Phillips. I don't recall that but I am sure that I
did.
Mr. Goldsmith. And then specifically there was a discus-
sion in reference to the Oswald visit to Mexico City. Do you
recall that?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. For the purposes of further clarification,
you gave testimony regarding the substance of a transcript that
you reviewed and it pertained to an intercept of an Oswald
conversation. Specifically, the intercept was linked to Oswald
prior to the assassination and the particular time involved was
early October, late September of 1963. Do you recall giving
testimony to that effect?
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000813
NW 50955 DocId: 32277212 Page 13
SECRET
Mr. Phillips. Yes, and I believe that then I finally
came down in that testimony on the fact that I believe I
recall seeing a transcript after the assassination which
substantiated the story told by a Mr. Celia Duran from the
Cuban embassy.
Mr. Goldsmith. We will try to work this step by step.
I will get to that.
Mr. Phillips. Okay.
Mr. Goldsmith. My recollection is that you discussed
two intercepts and two transcripts but first was the transcript
that you reviewed in early October of 1963 and the substance
of that and the thrust of that conversation was more or less
as follows: Oswald was saying to the Celia that he spoke to
at the embassy, What have you heard about my visa? What news
do you have?
Mr. Phillips. Yes sir, I recall.
Mr. Goldsmith. You also made the statement to the effect
What's wrong? Why don't you do this? That should be a state-
ment to Oswald. Do you recall making that statement?
Mr. Phillips. Sir, I don't.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you recall indicating that your opinion
was that Oswald intimated to the Soviets, Well, you really
should talk to me?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I recall that.
Mr. Goldsmith. I see that you are hesitating somewhat.
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000814
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 14
SECRET
For purposes of refreshing your memory I would like briefly
to review that portion of the transcript with you.
Will the clerk hand the witness a copy.
Specifically I would ask you to refer to page 51, line 12.
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith. Read that paragraph.
Mr. Phillips. At the beginning of line 12?
Mr. Goldsmith. Starting with line 12 to line 21.
Mr. Phillips. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you recall giving that testimony?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir. If I may mention the context
and the circumstances under which it was given, the reason that
I was called on that holiday weekend is that there was a story
in the Washington Post by Mr. Ron Kessler and that story came
out in effect saying that I confirmed the fact that Oswald
had offered something to the Soviets and that information
about that first message was not passed to the Warren Commis-
sion, so those are the circumstances under which I was called
out.
I was working under the fact that I didn't think Mr.
Kessler's report without our various conversations on the
subject was an accurate reflection of what I thought and so
that paragraph was saying in trying to recall these things
that perhaps it was my total perception in looking back one
Lee Harvey Oswald was there trying to get a visa and my
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000815
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 15
SECRET
feeling that he was saying to them, Yes, you should give me
one. Thinking about that and I think I might have mentioned
this -- some of that may very well have come from the fact
that afterwards I read that when he went to Mexico City he
went with some papers to show them that he was a member of
the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and so forth.
Mr. Goldsmith. I believe, Mr. Phillips, that you did
at that time make a distinction between your recollection that
was based upon the transcript that you reviewed in October of
1963 and events subsequent to the assassination. We will get
into that distinction later on.
Mr. Phillips. All right.
Mr. Goldsmith. In addition you also testified before
the committee about an intercept that came to your attention
after the assassination; specifically it was a conversation
between Silia Duran and somebody else and it was about Oswald.
Do you recall that?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. With regard to the transcript, the sub-
stance of your testimony was that it was treated in the normal
way; the transcript was routed to a Mr. Manell who was in
charge of Soviet operations in Mexico City and then later to
you, and the reason it was routed to you was because of the
Cuban mention in it. Do you recall giving testimony to that
effect?
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000816
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 16
SECRET
Mr. Phillips. Yes. I am not sure that I said I was
absolutely positive of that but that is the way it should
have happened and I had that recollection.
Mr. Goldsmith. For purposes of further clarification
why don't we take a look at page 57, line 6, and have you
read that section. Read through to line 10, please.
Mr. Phillips. All right.
Mr. Goldsmith. Have you read that? Do you recall
giving testimony to the effect of the substance that I just
summarized for you?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine.
Mr. Phillips. If I may add something there.
Mr. Goldsmith. You will get a chance to go into the
details later in the hearing. This is primarily for back-
ground purposes.
Mr. Phillips. I see. Very good.
Mr. Goldsmith. With regard to the transcript, you also
gave testimony regarding a transcriber's note that the person
speaking spoke in very bad Russian and you had the understand-
ing that the person speaking was an American. Do you recall
giving testimony to that effect?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. You also gave testimony with regard to
the cable that was sent from Mexico City to CIA headquarters
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000817
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 17
SECRET
and you indicated that this cable was sent approximately three
days after you first saw the intercept. Do you recall giving
testimony to that effect?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. And you also indicated that in fact you
signed off on the cable because of the reference to a Cuban
situation. Do you recall that?
Mr. Phillips. I recall that I said I probably signed off
on it. It would have been part of my job and so forth, yes,
but I recall it.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine. At that time you also gave testi-
mony explaining to the committee why the cable was sent out
several days after the intercept came in.
Mr. Phillips. Yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. And specifically you indicated that
Mr. Manell was busy, he sometimes procrastinated, and in fact
you considered the cable important and for this reason you
made some inquiries of him as to whether the cable had been
sent. Do you recall that?
Mr. Phillips. Something along that line, yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. With regard to the contents of the cable
the substance of your testimony was that it referred to Lee
Henry Oswald, it gave the physical description that did not
fit Mr. Oswald and it indicated that a contact with the Soviet
embassy had been made in reference to a visa. Do you recall
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000818
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 18
SECRET
giving testimony to that effect?
Mr. Phillips. I do. At a later date I decided that I
was wrong about the Henry originating in that cable.
Mr. Goldsmith. We will get into that later on.
Mr. Phillips. All right.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like to indicate for the record
that in the event that I do not cover a question or raise a
question that permits you to answer what is on your mind, at
the end of the hearing you will be given five minutes to
address the committee to raise any additional points.
Mr. Phillips. Very good.
Mr. Goldsmith. Similarly, at the time of your testimony
you gave testimony to the effect that the cable made reference
to a photograph, it gave an incorrect description of Oswald
and that the reason for this was that either Mr. Manell or
Mrs. Manell had put together a transcript of a man calling
the Soviet embassy about a visa with a picture of that man
who had been to the Soviet embassy so that a transcript and
a picture had been put together and I believe your testimony
was that in this case 1 and 1 did not equal 2.
Mr. Phillips. That is correct.
Mr. Goldsmith. You also gave testimony regarding the
cable that came from headquarters to the Mexico City station
on or about October 16 and that cable had the correct name of
Oswald according to your testimony. It gave the background
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000819
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 19
SECRET
of Oswald, his marriage to a Soviet citizen, his military
background. Further, it gave a correct description of Oswald.
I believe you indicated that the cable originated before
Oswald's contact with the Soviet embassy. Do you recall
giving testimony to that effect?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I do.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like at this point to go into
these areas in more detail.
First turning to the area of tapes, how long were tapes
retained as a matter of routine procedure in Mexico City in
1963 prior to the tapes being erased for reuse, if you know?
Mr. Phillips. All right. I must tell you that my
recollection is based on what I understood other people were
doing. I was never involved in the business of handling the
tapes per se, I never visited the place where the transcribing
was done and so forth but my recollection was that they were
usually kept for a couple of weeks or so and then they were
erased so that you would not have them piling up in a room
and reused again. I did not actually deal with the tapes.
Mr. Goldsmith. After the assassination did the Mexico
City station have in its possession a tape of Lee Harvey
Oswald's voice?
Mr. Phillips. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like at this time for the clerk
to give to Mr. Phillips a stack of materials that we received
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000820
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 20
SECRET
from the CIA.
I would ask you to refer to CIA document No. 198. For
the record I will indicate that these are materials that you
received from the Central Intelligence Agency yesterday and
the agency has made an effort to provide us with the documents
that we need. At the same time they have asked that we make
every effort to keep these documents secure and account for
them. In that regard they have numbered every document that
they have given to us and rather than introduce these documents
into the record I will simply be referring to the document by
the number that the agency has assigned to it. So in this
case we are referring to CIA No. 198.
Mr. Phillips. This is a cable, yes.
Am I correct that this is a cable?
Mr. Goldsmith. Yes.
Mr. Phillips. And it is the red number 198 that you are
referring to at the bottom of the page. I ask if you would
please read through this cable.
Mr. Phillips. All right, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith. Now I believe you have identified this as
a cable. What is the date of the cable?
Mr. Phillips. 23 November 1963.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like to refer your attention to
the second paragraph, specifically the second sentence of that
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000821
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 21
SECRET
paragraph, and ask you to reread that, please.
Mr. Phillips. All right, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith. Now according to the sentence it indicates
that the station is unable to compare voices because the first
tape was erased prior to the receipt of the second call. Does
this suggest to you that one tape was still in existence at
the time that the cable was sent? In other words, the cable
does not say all tapes re Oswald have been erased, it indicates
we are unable to compare voices because the first tape was
erased prior to the receipt of the second call.
Mr. Phillips. Yes. Obviously it means we cannot compare
voices because we do not have two.
Mr. Goldsmith. Therefore implying that there may still
be one.
Mr. Phillips. That reading could be put in there, I
suppose, yes.
Mr. Goldsmith. Based upon this, to your knowledge did the
Mexico City station after the assassination have in its posses-
sion a tape of Lee Harvey Oswald's voice or someone whom they
thought to be Lee Harvey Oswald?
Mr. Phillips. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Goldsmith. Now I believe paragraph 1 of this cable
makes reference to a conversation involving Celia Duran on
September 28 and also two unidentified North Americans and
the cable suggests that the person who contacted the Cuban
SECRET
ALDERSON REFORTING COMPANY
000822
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 22
SECRET
and Soviet embassies on September 28 is Oswald. What I would
like to ask you is, do you think it was unusual for the first
tape to be erased quite so soon? In other words, one contact
is made on September 28, another is made on 1 October and
within four days the first tape is erased. Is there anything
unusual about that?
Mr. Phillips. Well, it is a question of judgment of the
people who are handling the case how important something is.
I do know that it was routine to erase tapes so that they
could be used again and I do know that the Soviet and Cuban
embassies, there were a number of unusual visitors over the
years. Some of them seemed to be sort of kooky, some of them
you didn't quite understand. Looking back I certainly agrees
with this. This is the kind of thing that should not have
been erased. I don't think it was highly unusual, no.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like to refer you now to CIA
document No. 239 and specifically in the middle of the page
I believe it says CS Comment and there is an asterisk and a
sentence after that. Would you please read that sentence.
Mr. Phillips. "Station to erase routine tapes. Soviet
embassy keeping normal two week lag."
Mr. Goldsmith. So according to this cable and also to
your testimony, the normal lag would be two weeks and yet we
have an erasure of cable, the Oswald tape, within several days
after its receipt. Based on that do you regard the erasure
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000823
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 23
SECRET
of the first Oswald tape as unusual, not in keeping with
routine procedure?
Mr. Phillips. No, it is not. The routine procedure I
now read here was a normal two week lag so doing it so earlier
was certainly not keeping within the routine procedure.
Mr. Goldsmith. Do you know who the person would be that
the committee might address regarding the specific tapes?
Mr. Phillips. I believe in my previous -- either in my
testimony before the committee or in my day long session with
the staff members before I gave them the names of people who
I thought would be knowledgeable of that. They were a Mr.
George Monroe, a Miss Ann Goodpasture and possibly Mr. Robert
Shaw.
Mr. Goldsmith. Turning for a moment to Miss Goodpasture,
what were her responsibilities at the Mexico City station?
Mr. Phillips. Well, she was an experienced CIA officer
and so she had a number of responsibilities across the board
as I recall them. Without making a depreciation she was sort
of the girl Friday to the Chief of the Station in the sense
that she often called on her to handle a lot of things.
Specifically though, however, I do recall that she did have
the job of some sort of liaison with the outside unit where
these tapes were done. I believe not suitcases but in and
out of our office with suitcases -- I recall her coming brief-
cases that might have had tapes or transcripts or something
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000824
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 24
SECRET
in them.
Mr. Goldsmith. Is it fair to say that Winn Scott, the
Station Chief, relied on Ann Goodpasture a great deal?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, I think that is an accurate state-
ment.
Mr. Goldsmith. Was she in any way given more responsi-
bilities than the case officers at the Mexico City station?
Mr. Phillips. I certainly don't believe that she was
given operational responsibility -- that is, with cases that
were being run and that sort of thing. Since she enjoyed the
confidence of the Chief of Station, perhaps he did give her
some assignments non-operational in aspect that might be more
important than some of the case officers, yes, but she herself
of course was at that time certainly a middle grade officer.
Mr. Goldsmith. I would like now to refer you to CIA
document No. 206 which is a cable dated 23 November 1963 and
I ask you to read paragraph 4 which can be found on page 208.
Mr. Phillips. Yes, sir.
Mr. Goldsmith First of all, Douglas J. Fineglass, that
was the pseudonym for Mr. Boris Tere off, was it not?
Mr. Phillips. I do not recall that it was. I remember
the last time I testified I thought it might have been a man
named George something.
Mr. Goldsmith. Misco?
Mr. Phillips. Misco. I do recall the name that you are
SECRET
ALDERSON REPORTING COMPANY
000825
NW 50955 DocId:32277212 Page 25
SECRET
mentioning but I cannot say definitely that that is his
pseudonym.
Mr. Goldsmith. Fine. In any event the cable here is
dated after the assassination and it indicates that Mr.
Fineglass, whoever he is, says that Oswald is identical with
the person in paragraph 1 speaking broken Russian, a call
from the Cuban embassy, 28 September, to the Soviet embassy.
There again we have another suggestion in the CB cable chapter
that after the assassination the agency in fact did have a
tape of Oswald's voice. Based upon paragraph 4, would that
be your judgment?!
Mr. Phillips. No, simply because of my firm recollection
that a tape did not exist after the assassination. I am not
sure in my mind, counselor. I cannot remember whether the
reason that we had Oswald on tape was because we were covering
a Cuban phone and he happened to call the Soviet embassy or
whether we were covering a Soviet phone and picked him up that
way but I do go back to a very, very brief early message of
his contacts, not the one about Celia