180-10131-10340
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
10/19/20
Agency Information
AGENCY: HSCA
RECORD NUMBER:
180-10131-10340
RECORD SERIES : SECURITY CLASSIFIED TESTIMONY
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: 014849
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
FROM:
HSCA
[Restricted]
TO:
TITLE:
DATE:
PAGES:
11/28/1976
109
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
CIA, METHODOLOGY
[Restricted]
[Restricted]
TRANSCRIPT
Declassified
3
Redact
01/01/2003
Box 10
v9.1
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 1
1
MEXICO CITY
FILE INDEX
FOLDER: Tarasoff Interviews
Transcript
Interviews of Boris and Ann Tarasoff, former
contract employees of the CIA at Mexico City Station.
Taken by Jonathan Blackmer and Ken Brooten on November 29-30, 1976.
Regarding intercepts of Oswald's phone calls to the
Soviet Embassy from the Cuban Embassy. (2 copies)
Attached memoranda of the investigative field trip which
included contacts with Ambassador John Jova and CIA Station
Chief Thomas Polgar, regarding possible information on
the assassination coming from the Cuban government.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 2
TARASOFF BRIEFING BOOK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Procedural Memorandum on Committee meeting, 13 April 1978.
Biography of Boris Dimitry Tarasoff and Anna Tarasoff.
Goal #1:
To determine the Tarasoffs! knowledge of, and participation in,
Central Intelligence Agency surveillance activities in Mexico
City in 1963.
Goal #2:
To determine the nature and circumstances of the monitoring of
Lee Harvey Oswald by CIA surveillance in Mexico City in 1963
and the nature of the Tarasoffs involvement in that monitoring.
Goal #3:
To determine if the Tarasoffs ever did voice comparisons in an
attempt to identify Lee Harvey Oswald's voice or the voices of
the people with whom he spoke.
C
Exhibits:
C
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 3
EXHIBITS ARE CURRENTLY CLASSIFIED AND WILL, HOPEFULLY, BE PROVIDED AT
A LATER DATE.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 4
FACTUAL BACKGROUND.
The Tarasoffs do not remember identifying the voices of any of the
people with whom Oswald spoke prior to the assassination. They do not
remember ever being asked to do so after the assassination. They do
not remember ever being questioned before being contacted by HSCA
investigators.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 5
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
The Tarasoffs claim to remember translating and transcribing at least 2
conversations involving Oswald. They remember that the first one was fairly
short and routine. Oswald did not identify himself in this first conver-
sation. The second one was much longer and Oswald did identify himself
in this conversation. The Tarasoffs remember Oswald discussing his finan-
cial situation in this call. They deny making any editorial or marginal
comments in the transcription of this call.
The Tarasoffs remember nothing unusual about the first call or the
circumstances around its delivery or transcription. The second call was
delivered to them and they were asked to transcribe the Oswald call as
quickly as possible. Their contact expressed a strong interest in the
identity of the caller and the substance of the call. The Tarasoffs
translated and transcribed the call and returned the transcript on the
same day, using an emergency contact as opposed to waiting until the next
morning and using their standard contact.
It is not clear whether or not the Tarasoffs have any independent
memory of any other calls involving Oswald.
Exhibits are classified and will be added at a later date. Questions
based on these exhibits will be asked.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 6
BIOGRAPHY
BORIS DIMITRY TARASOFF
Boris Dimitry Tarasoff was born on 2 November 1908 in Yekaterinoslaw,..
Russia. He emigrated to the United States. He worked for the Central
Intelligence Agency from circa 1955 to October 1970. He was stationed
in Mexico City from June 1963 to October 1970. Mr. Tarasoff's main task
during this period was translation/transcription of Russian language
tapes. He is currently retired and living at the Rancho Contento,
Guadalajara, Mexico.
ANNA TARASOFF
Anna Tarasoff was born on 5 May 1923. She is the wife of Boris
Dimitry Tarasoff. She worked as a part time CIA contract officer. She
assisted her husband in the translation/transcription of the Russian
language tapes.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 7
GOAL #1.
To determine the Tarasoffs knowledge of, and participation in,
the Central Intelligence Agency's surveillance activities in Mexico
City in 1963.
a) background.
b) assignments.
c) awareness of surveillance operations.
d) duties (translation/transcription).
e) procedures.
d) other duties.
e) personnel involved.
f) files.
g) nature of transcripts.
h) nature of assistance in duties if any.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 8
FACTUAL BACKGROUND.
Boris and Anna Tarasoff were stationed in Mexico City in 1963.
They were the Russian translators used to translate and transcribe the
Russian language portions of surveillance tapes. Hence, they have actual
knowledge of a portion of that operation.
In an interview with members of this staff the Tarasoffs said that
the tapes and Spanish language transcripts would be delivered to them on
the morning of one day by a person who worked on this operation. The next
day the Tarasoffs would return the tape, Spanish transcript and the completed
translation/transcript of the Russian language portions. The Tarasoffs
said that they made an original copy and two carbons of every transcription.
The original and one copy was retained by the Tarasoffs. One carbon was
turned over to their contact.
Mr. Tarasoff also said that he was responsible for trying to identify,
by their voices, the Soviet Embassy personnel involved in conversations
which he transcribed.
The Tarasoffs, by the nature of their involvement in the operation, should
have some knowledge of some of the other individuals involved in this oper-
ation.
The Tarasoffs said that the transcripts they prepared were literal
transcriptions as opposed to summaries. They said that they made no marginal
comments on the body of the transcripts.
Mr. Tarasoff was assisted in translating and transcribing the tapes by
his wife, Anna Tarasoff.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 9
GOAL #2.
To determine the nature and circumstances of the monitoring of
Lee Harvey Oswald by CIA surveillance in Mexico City in 1963 and
the nature of the Tarasoffs' involvement in that monitoring.
a) the first conversation.
b) the second conversation.
c) nature of circumstances surrounding the delivery and trans-
cription of the conversations.
d) any subsequent conversations transcribed.
e) exhibits.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 10
GOAL #3.
To determine if the Tarasoffs ever did voice comparisons in an
attempt to identify Lee Harvey Oswald's voice or the voices of the
people with whom he spoke.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 11
23 February 1978
Highlights from Tarasoff interview by Booten and Blackmore.
Full Name: Boris Dimitry Tarasoff.
DOB: 11/2/08
POB: Yekaterinoslaw, Russia.
Present Address: Ranch Contento, Guadalajara, Mexico.
Sent to Mexico on 5 June 1963.
P. 6. Worked as a translator/transcriber outside Embassy at 312 San Puerta Ave.
Robert Zambanardi at times delivered tapes to him. (7)
Also remembers another man who delivered tapes Rudy (LNU) possibly Bruno. (7)
William Bright also delivered tapes to him (9)
Charles Flick supervised the intercept operation (12)
also repaired tape recorders, got new ones etc. (12)
P.17+ transcription operation description:
This transcript would indicate where the
got tapes with Spanish transcripts.
Russian language parts were, Tarasoff would run the tape to that point and would
then translate and transcribe simultaneously.
conversations that were partially in English.
P 19+ Oswald tape:
Ann assisted Boris with
Remembers that a major portion of his conversation (9/28) was in English and
his wife worked on it.
was rather short.
remembers that all he was doing on this conversation was trying to make contacts
to get into the Russian Embassy.
Did not ID himself in this conversation.
Second conversation:
Note came with the tape giving conversation reference and asking them to ID the
caller. Instruction was that if this was done they were to contact immediately
their CIA contact and deliver the transcript to him. "this was top priority"
"It was very important to them" This conversation was long, two pages.
It was delivered with the usual batch of tapes but this one was singled out
and given priority. This conversation was also largely in English.
himself in this one. They notified contact and it was immediately picked up.
Rerredbtcortal commemesa No way! There were no comments mades What was
typed, was, what was being said by this individual
LHO IDed
definitely remember that he was seeking financial aid from the Cubans and
Russians to get to Cuba/Russia.
He did tell them he was broke.
Does not remember him offering information.
Do not remember him asking anything about a visa.
Typed on Government Bond with two copies. (33)
P. 38 Tarasoff contacted his "emergency" contact to turn over the 2nd LHO
transcript. He declined to give this contact's name. this was done on the
same day as he recieved the tape.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 12
Page Two
They would be able to recognize the original transcript if they saw it.
(40)
hey transcribed tapes verbatim, adding nothing and leaving nothing out.
P.43 T..never saw the transcript again or heard the tape.
Tarasoff was never recontacted about the Oswald tapes and transcripts.
Anna. Tarasoff:
DOB 5/5/23
"I filed according to the date of the reel and the reel itself had a number
and then following that each conversation had a number and I that would be
the original copy that I would file as it is in whole. Then the carbon copy
would be also kept in its original state and the second one I would sort of
scan it over and just delete what was not pertinent like it was a conversation
with somebody saying, well tomorrow I'm going downtown.... But it it had to
deal with two poeple and especially if there names were mentioned, this was
cut out and it was pasted on a piece of paper and it was turned over to our
contact." normal procedure was to turn over previous batch of transcripts
when new batch of tapes were delivered the next morning. (54-55)
71 Dan VOGEL picked up the equipment and files from the Tarasoff's when they
retired.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 13
MEMORANDUM
TO:
12-5-76
Richard A. Sprague
FROM:
Kenneth E. Brooten, Jr.
IN RE: Contacts with Ambassador John Joseph Jova, U. S. Embassy Mexico
City and Thomas Polgar, CIA Station Chief, Mexico City.
1.
I Initially met with William Calderhead, Deputy Chief of Mission
U. S. Embassy, Mexico City and advised him of the following:
2.
a)
I had received information from the Committee Staff indicating
that someone had contacted them advising that the Cuban Embassy
personnel in Mexico City would be willing to meet with us and
provide us with the information which they had on Lee Harvey
Oswald.
b)
I had not been advised of the source of the information by
the Committee Staff and I did not know the reliability of
the source.
c)
I had discussed the matter with you for "instructions" and
had been advised by you that I should take the matter up with
the Ambassador.
Mr. Calderhead suggested that we make a formal contact through the
Department of State and have them go through the Swiss, since the
Swiss represent the interest of the U. S. Government in Havana.
I met with Ambassador Jova at his residence on December 2, 1976, and
advised him of the foregoing. I also advised that while the Committee
would be most interested in obtaining any information we could from
the Cubans we were very much aware of the complications which could
arise should the information prove to be erroneous.
I further advised the Ambassador that we did not want to do anything
which could cause embarrassment to the U. S. Government or the
Congress and that we wanted to proceed with his consent and advice.
The Ambassador advised:
a)
b)
The official U. S. position is that there are to be no official
contacts with the Government of Cuba.
He knows the Ambassador from Cuba on a social basis and could
make a discrete approach and inquiry.
c)
He would have to get "instructions" from Washington to make an
approach and inquiry from the Cuban Ambassador.
d)
He very much appreciated our consulting with him since it was a
very delicate matter..
I suggested that possibly the C.I.A. could have some source either
direct or indirect which could verify whether or not the Cubans wanted
to meet with us.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 14
MEMORANDUM 12-5-76
Page 2
He stated that he had not discussed our visit with the C.I.A. Station
Chief but with my consent would do so. He offered to have the Station
Chief come to his residence or have us meet him at his residence.
3.
I met with Thomas Polgar the C.I.A. Station Chief and advised him
of the situation and requested his assistance and judgement. He
advised:
a)
That some of his people had informal contacts with the Cubans
and could make an inquiry to see if a"responsible official"
of the Cuban Embassy would meet with us. To do so he would
have to get "instructions" from C.I.A. Headquarters but at
my request he would proceed to do so.
b)
He said that the Cubans would probably have to go to Havana
for "instructions" before they would reply. He further stated
that most of the information would probably be in Havana.
c)
I asked if he had any other method of determining the validity
of the information and he said that he was not prepared to
confirm whether there were wiretaps at this time. Later in
the conversation he said as a result of the story a copy of
which is attached that the Cubans had been saying less on the
phone.
d)
We agreed to meet with the Ambassador the next day to discuss
how to proceed.
4.
On Friday, December 3, 1976, I again met with the Ambassador and Mr.
Polgar. Mr. Polgar had not yet received a reply to his request for
"instructions," from C.I.A. Headquarters and again advised that the
Cubans would most likely go to Havana for "instructions" before
replying.
Ambassador Jova said he would seek instructions from State on making
an informal social contact with the Cuban Ambassador but suggested
that that would take time. He said the most proper method would be
to go through the Swiss and State here in Washington.
I advised that while we certainly wanted to obtain the information
that we wanted to use the most conservative approach so as not to
create an incident. The Ambassador again expressed his appreciation
for our sensitivity to a "delicate situation."
ACTION TO BE TAKEN:
5.
a)
b)
Contact C.I.A. Headquarters to follow up on Polgar's request
for "instructions."
Contact the Department of State and request that they go through
the Swiss with a formal contact to the Cubans in Havana and follow
up on Ambassador Jova's request for instructions.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 15
MEMORANDUM 12-5-76
Page 3
c)
Both of these follow up actions should, in my judgement,
be initiated immediately.
d)
If we can confirm the contact with the Cubans it will be
necessary for me to return to Mexico City, and I would
purpose to do so as soon as we receive a confirmation.
6.
Jonothan Blackmer accompanied me to each of the meetings.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 16
STREET STAND PRICES (IN PESOS)
Mexico City, Cuernavaca, San Miguel, Puebla
Guadalajara, Chapala..
Acapulco, Mazatlan, Cancun, Puerto Vallarta, Manzanillo
Daily Sunday
1.00
3:10
1.60 6:00
3.00
7.00-
The News
Vol. XXVII Mexico City, Wednesday, December 1, 1976
No. 149.
32
THE NEWS. Mexico City
Wednesday. December 1, 1976.
JFK Murder Probers Sent to Mexico
Investigators for the House
Committee on Assassinations
have been sent to Mexico to
verify a report that the CIA,
for unexplained reasons,
withheld information about
Lee Harvey Oswald from the
Warren Commission, ac-
cording to Associated Press
reports from Washington.
Quoting committee
spokesmen, AP said the
investigators will interview
two retired agency employés
who reportedly heard Oswald
offer a deal to Soviet officials
in Mexico City less than two
months before the
assassination of President
John F. Kennedy.
The Washington Post has
reported that Oswald's voice
was picked up through
electronic surveillance of the
Cuban and Soviet embassies
and transcribed by the two
agency employes.
David A. Phillips, a now.
retired CIA officer who was
stationed in Mexico City at
the time, also has recalled
Oswald making such
offer.
:
an
Phillips and the two
former agency emploves who
were not identified all
recalled that Oswald offered
unspecified information in
return for a free trip to the
Soviet Union.
It was not clear what effec:
this version of Oswald's
conversation would have had
on the Warren Commission,
AP said.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 17
MEMORANDUM
DATE:
December 5, 1976
TO:
Richard Sprague
FROM:
Jon Blackmer
SUBJECT:
Specific Inquiry into the Identity of the Person
with whome Oswald spoke in the Two Phone Calls
Intercepted by the CIA in Mexico City and
Transcribed by Mr. and Mrs. Tarasoff.
On November 30, in Guadalajara, Mexico, Ken thought
it best that I ask some specific questions of the
Tarasoff's as to the identify of the person or persons
Oswald may have spoken with during the two telephone
conversations that were intercepted by the CIA and trans-
cribed by the Tarasoffs. I thought I should inquire of
the Tarasoffs about their knowledge of the voices of
the various employees of the Soviet Embassy in Mexico
City and the identity of the various KGB men, including
the disputes over the "Kostin" identify appearing in the
letter Oswald wrote to the Soviet Embassy in Washington
on November 8, 1963. The following is a brief report
on the substance of that interrogation.
After three sessions with the Tarasoffs prior to
the taping of the session for transcription, we learned
that Mr. Tarasoff had been assigned to the Mexico City
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 18
-2-
desk for the express purpose of translating and transcribing
conversations in the Russian language going into and out
of the Soviet Embassy by telephone. In the course of
their employment, the Tarasoffs became familiar with
the voices of the Russians and could instantly identify
the names of many of the Russians within the embassy
when their voices were heard. Mr. Tarasoff even went
so far as to put together his own scrapbook with pictures
and newspaper clippings of his "Russians" so that he
could become as familiar as possible with their identity
and background, deemed essential by Mr. Tarasoff to under-
stand the content of the conversation by the voice
inflection. That is to say, knowledge of the region
these various Russians came from would aid greatly in
identifying the context of the conversations when various
idioms and colloquialisms were used. In short, Mr. and
Mrs. Tarasoff did their jobs well and in many cases were
always toward the goal of proficiency.
innovators
Mr. Tarasoff came up with the idea of voice sample
tapes to be indexed by identity for use whenever the need
might arise to compare voices or a dispute as to identity
of voices. But all voices whether identified or not were
indexed. Mr. Tarasoff brought this up with Herb Mannell
and was given permission to make these identity tapes.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 19
-3-
Mr. Tarasoff knew the voices of Yatskov, Kostikov,
Kanstantinov among others. He did not, however, know
of any of these men's proficiency in English, but felt
that only Kostikov and Kanstantinov could handle English
well enough to speak it in a cursory fashion. Based on
this they formed the opinion that Kanstantinov was more
than likely the person to which Oswald spoke, unless
there was another individual not known to the Tarasoffs,
with whom Oswald may have spoken. It is of interest to
note that while the Russians almost exclusively spoke
Russian with each other and many Embassy employees spoke
Spanish, very few, Boris believes probably only Kostikov
and Kanstantinov spoke English well enough to get by.
Additionally, because of this fact, Boris was not as
proficient at identifying his Russians when they spoke
English since the voice sounds entirely different, almost
mechanical when the Russians were speaking English. They
do not believe Oswald spoke with Yatskov or Kostikov on
the occasion of the two telephone calls transcribed by
the Tarasoffs.
One thing is certain, Mr. Tarasoff was the expert
on the station in Mexico City when Oswald called the Soviet
Embassy from the Cuban Embassy. Mr. Tarasoff succeeded
George Misko who was in Mexico City in the same function as
Mr. Tarasoff. Mr. Tarasoff was never asked. who Oswald
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 20
-4-
spoke with, never identified the person with whom Oswald
spoke, nor ever was asked anything about the incident.
Mr. Tarasoff had on other occasions been asked to identify
voices, and has had tapes returned to him on other occasions
for that purpose. Both the Tarasoffs feel the information
contained in the October 16, 1963 memo was not the complete
and relevant as to the substance of the telephone conversations.
that the Tarasoff's transcribed.
Thus we are faced with the issue of why when Boris
was the expert, heard the tape pursuant to his function,
was the best person qualified to identify the Russians
by their voices, why was he never consulted by anyone before
or after the assassination as to the substance of the phone
calls and the person with whom Oswald spoke. Yet the
Warren Commission Report states that Oswald contacted
Kostikov or Yatskov and based on this other information
(presumably from Duran) and in answer to the questions posed
by Oswald's letter to the Soviet Embassy in Washington in
which Oswald mentions having contacted Kostin. The
Tarasoffs do not feel Kostin is the short form of Kanstantinov
or Kostikov nor do they know a Kostin. Boris knew
Kostikov and Kanstantinov and Yatskov were KGB and knew the
voices of Yatscov and Kostikov and Kanstantinov. When the
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 21
-5-
first call came in Boris was notified that the station
was extremely interested in the identity of the caller.
That when the second call came, the tape was rushed to
Boris and when Oswald was identified the contact
(probably Bright) seemed extremely interested and excited.
Tarasoff typed transcripts verbatim, since at one point,
unlike Misko, his predecessor, Tarasoff made a summary of
a meaningless conversation and made his own comments to that
effect, and was jumbed on by Bill Bright for so doing.
Tarasoff did not make comments on transcripts except for
using M.I. for man inside and M.O. for man outside when
they were readily identifiable. Boris feels that if at
the time had he been asked about the Oswald calls, he would
have been able to supply much more information, but 14 years
has dimmed his memory and no one, not even Bright, his
contact, discussed the subject with him.
In a separate interview with Mr. Tarasoff on November
30, 1976, I learned that the photographic expert on station
in Mexico City in 1963 September to November was Bob
Zambernardi. Zambernardi's office telephone in Mexico City
is possibly 24-28-85 and his home number in Mexico City
is possibly 20-36-15. Zambernardi is married to the daughter
of one Mrs. Minor who lives at Coyocan # 10 in Colonia del
Vajae, which is a suburb of Mexico City. The phone number
is possibly 23-00-78. Zambernardi was probably the man in
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 22
-6-
charge of photographing the activities of both the Cuban
and Soviet embassies in 1963.
Having a copy of Coup d'etat in America with me.
I thought I would ask the Tarasoffs if they could identify
any of the photographs in the book. Specifically,
photographs of the bums arrested in Dallas on the day
of the assassination. Three photographs of Howard Hunt,
two photographs of Frank Sturgis. I asked whether the
Tarasoffs knew any of these men either professionally
or socially. The Tarasoffs were unable to identify any
of the photographs, nor could they recall seeing any of
the individuals in Mexico City or anywhere else. However,
I got the feeling that Boris indicated a faint glimmer
of recognition when I showed him the picture of Eugene
Edgar Bradley which appears on page 222 of the text. I
don't know whether Boris knew this man and as he stated
he did not and as his credibility, in my opinion, is very
high, I think the man probably resembles someone Boris might
have known. They could not recall having known Howard Hunt
in Mexico City nor having seen him. These photographs
came from pages 208 through 223 of the above book.
We also went over photographs of the mysterious man
leaving the Soviet Embassy. The Tarasoffs had their own
copies of these photos supplied by Ron Kessler. While
the Tarasoffs thought they were all of the same man on
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 23
-7-
two different occasions, they could not positively identify
them. Mr. Tarasoff felt the man was Russian, and that
he was wearing clothing one would wear on a fishing trip.
Mr. Tarasoff noted the Russians were crazy about fishing.
He felt the first photograph was blocked in such a way
as to make the man appear much heavier than he really
was, but in comparing all the photographs with his
personal file of photos and newspaper clips, he could
not match them. The first photograph we were referring
to is the one that just shows the head and shoulders of
a man in a dark sweater. He did however feel that
one photo looked a lot like Alfredeyev, Soviet KGB, but felt
the mystery man was much heavier. I have no photo of
Alfredeyev, but he looks a little like the french film
star Yves Montand.
I would recommend following this lead by first
interviewing Charles Flick, then George Misko, then
Bill Bright, then Robert Zambernardi, then Clark Anderson,
then Herb Mannell, and then possibly, Sylvia Duran to
pick up the thread.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 24
MEMORANDUM
TO:
Richard A. Sprague
FROM:
Kenneth E. Brooten, Jr.
IN RE: Mexico City Trip -- Brooten & Blackmer
1.
We initially had reservations to depart on an American Airlines
Flight at 7:15 a.m. on Sunday, November 28, 1976. Jonathan had
called American to confirm the fact that we only had to show our
official passports to get a tourist visa for Mexico. We arrived
at the airport at 6:30 a.m. and were advised that they could not
issue Mexican Tourist Cards on Official Passports. I called the
operations desk at the Department of State who said the Official
Passport was proof of American Citizenship and that should be
sufficient. American Airlines employees would not accept that
so rather than create a confrontation as to who we were we took
a later flight and traveled on our personal passports.
2.
Upon our arrival in Mexico City we were met by William J. Roche,
the Chief of Security for the Embassy. The Embassy had reserved
rooms for us.
3.
On Monday, November 29, 1976, Mr. Roche made airline reservations
for us to Guadajalara it is a 1 hour flight and approximately
355 miles from Mexico City. He arranged to have us met by Mathias
Ortwein the Consul General. Mr. Ortwein made arrangements for our
hotel and offered us the use of his personal vehicle.
4.
We made initial contact with Boris Tarasoff at approximately 3:30 p.m.
His wife was not at home and had been in Guadajalara for 5 or 6 days
at their daughters taking care of her sick children. Our interview
with Mr. Tarasoff lasted until approximately 9:00 p.m. when we went
to Guadajalara to meet with his wife. We interviewed her until
approximately 11:00 p.m.
5.
Following our telephone conversation on Tuesday, November 30, we
taped the formal interview which is transcribed. Jonathan is
preparing a separate Memorandum on the specific areas of inquiry
which I asked him to make.
6.
We returned to Mexico City on Thursday, December 2, 1976, and took
up the matters at the Embassy which are the subject of my separate
Memoranda. We returned to Washington on Saturday, December 4, 1976.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 25
11-28-76 to 12-4-76
Interview with Boris Dimitry Tarasoff and Ann Tarasoff at
Ranch Contento, Guadalajara, Mexico on Tuesday, November 30,
1976, 1:15 (local time).
Mr. Brooten: Mr. and Mrs. Tarasoff, do you understand
that my name is Kenneth Brooten, I am Counsel for the Select
Committee on Assassinations of the United States Congress
in the House of Representatives and with me is Jonathan
Blackmer, also a Counsel to the Committee and that we are
recording this interview with you today?
Mr. Tarasoff: Yes sir.
Mrs. Tarasoff: We've seen your identifications and
we feel that you're documents are authentic.
Mr. Brooten: And, do we have your consent to tape
this interview?
Mrs. Tarasoff: Yes, you do.
Mr. Tarasoff: Yes.
Mr. Brooten: Now, I'll start with Mr. Tarasoff first.
Mr. Tarasoff, for the record would you please state your
full name.
Mr. Tarasoff: Boris Dimitry Tarasoff.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 26
-2-
Mr. Brooten: Thank you sir. And your current address.
Mr. Tarasoff: Ranch Contento, Guadalajara, Mexico.
Mr. Brooten: And your date of birth sir.
Mr. Tarasoff: November 2, 1908.
Mr. Brooten: And your place of birth.
Mr. Tarasoff: Yekaterinoslaw, Russia.
Mr. Brooten: Allright, sir. What is your occupation
or profession.now?
Mr. Tarasoff: I am retired.
Mr. Brooten: How long have you been retired?
Mr. Tarasoff: Since the end of October, 1970.
Mr. Brooten: Allright sir. And prior to that time,
what did you do, for whom were you employed?
Mr. Tarasoff: I was employed by the, so called, Company.
Mr. Brooten: All right. And the Company is the Central
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 27
-3-
Mr. Brooten: Intelligence Agency.
Mr. Tarasoff: Well, let's put it that way.
Mr. Brooten: All right. We just want to clarify that
for the record.
Mr. Tarasoff: All right.
Mr. Brooten: And that is of the United States Government.
Mr. Tarasoff: Oh, definitely.
Mr. Brooten: And, at which, how long did you work for
the Company?
Mr. Tarasoff: About 15 years.
Mr. Brooten: All right sir. And in 1963 what was your
duty station.
Mr. Tarasoff: Well, I came here from Washington, D.C.
It must have been the sixth of June, if I'm not mistaken.
Mrs. Tarasoff: The fifth of June.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 28
-4-
Mr. Tarasoff: The fifth of June, 1963.
Mr. Brooten: All right, sir. And, were you on temporary
assignment then or what?
Mr. Tarasoff: No, that was to be my permanent assignment.
By permanent, I mean that you put in two years. And if you
are not satisfactory, they ship you back.
Mr. Brooten: All right.
Mr. Tarasoff: But I managed to survive for about eight
years in the same capacity.
Mr. Brooten: All right sir. Who did you relieve in
your job when you came.
Mr. Tarasoff: George Miscow was my predecessor.
Mr. Brooten: And where did you work specifically when
you came from Washington to Mexico City.
Mr. Tarasoff: Do you mean on permanent assignment?
Mr. Brooten: Yes sir. I mean when you were changed,
where did you work, for what department or.
NW 64937 Docld:32277225 Page 29
-5-
Mr. Tarasoff: I don't know which department.
Mr. Brooten: Was it with, were you a translator sir?
Mr. Tarasoff: I was translator and transcriber at the