198-10007-10001
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10007-10001
RECORD SERIES :
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
JCS
FROM:
V.H. KRULAK
TO:
SERVICE, OSD, JOINT STAFF
TITLE:
CUBA, THE EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE
ACTIVITIES - FIRST DRAFT
DATE:
03/13/1963
PAGES:
14
SUBJECTS:
COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES - INTELLIGENCE
SHARING
DOCUMENT TYPE:
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION:
Secret
RESTRICTIONS:
IB
CURRENT STATUS:
Redact
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
02/10/1998
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
Califano Papers, Box 3, Folder 10. First draft of paper on the exchange of intelligence concerning
communist subversive activities.
NO JOINT STAFF OBJECTION
TO DECLASSIFICATION
MAR
2016
DATE:
FK Review
Department of the Army EO 13526
Declassify Exclude Exempt
Authority
Refer To
Review Date 12AU615 By
v9.1
14
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 1
SECRET
Draft as changed
at 1330 nity
SUB-COMMITTEE ON CUBA SUBVERSION
1363
13 March 1963
TO SERVICE, OSD, AND JOINT STAFF CONTACT POINTS:
This is the first draft on the exchange of intelligence.
Section II on the Nature and Scope of the Problem possibly
should be shortened.
Your comments are requested by 0900, 14 March 1963.
V. H. KRULAK
Major General, USMC
SECRET
GROUP-1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 2
SECRET
FIRST DRAFT
CUBA
THE EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
I. Introduction
In combatting the many forms of Castro-Communist
subversion now pursued throughout Latin America from the
Communist base of operations in Cuba, there is a funda-
mental requirement for intelligence a requirement which
involves not only the timely acquisition and processing of
information, but also its rapid dissemination, on a select-
ive basis, to those who need to know. Efforts are now
being made by CIA, AID, and the U.S. Military Services to
improve Latin American intelligence systems. Success thus
far has been limited. This effort must be vigorously con-
tinued. It is not with this problem, however, that this
paper is primarily concerned, but rather with that of
exchanging essential information among those who need to
know it. A greater degree of Inter-American cooperation
is required in this regard than has hitherto been achieved.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 3
SECRET
II. The Nature and Scope of the Problem
1. Limiting Factors
There are many legitimate inhibitions which tend
to discourage the exchange of intelligence on an
international basis, even among allies. National
privacy with regard to the inner workings of an
intelligence system must be preserved. Further com-
pounding the problem insofar as Latin America is
concerned is the divisive influence of the long
history of rivalries, wars, jealousies and dis-
putes which have characterized relations among the
many nations concerned. The wounds of past con-
flicts among pairs and groupings of nations are
by no means completely healed. For example, there
is lingering hostility between Peru and Ecuador
deriving from their boundary war in which Ecuador
lost a vast area of its territory. Chile and
Bolivia continue at odds over the the
pute, and, even now, Nicaraguan insurgents are
harbored within the borders of Costa Rica.
could hardly be expected that these countries
would be prone to exchange intelligence.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 4
2-
dis-
to the
sea
SECRET
Latin America is not a homogeneous entity in
ethnic, social, political, and economic background,
and there is a great variety of attitudes toward
the Castro-Communist subversive menace. A com-
pletely unified approach toward exchange or intell-
igence concerning this menace, therefore, cannot
be regarded as practicable.
The realities outlined above indicate that
multilateral intelligence exchange must be approached
on a strictly limited basis. It should not be
concluded, however, that nothing of value can be
done multilaterally. With proper definition limit-
ing the problem of exchange to matters directly
related to communist subversive activities, such
as the movement to and from Cuba of subversives,
the production and movement of propaganda materials,
and the movement of arms, it should be possible
to encourage a greater degree of cooperation. It
is important, in this regard, to draw a sharp dis-
tinction between intelligence gained by covert means
and information obtained openly. The former involves
the requirement to protect national secrets as to
sources and methods employed. The latter, which can
be of great value, can be exchanged without fear of
compromise.
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 5
-3-
Place
ad
end
page
5
SECRET
An additional impediment to intelligence exchange
is the low level of competence of most Latin American
intelligence services, their lack of rapid, secure
means of communication, and the complete absence of
adequate security systems. Security consciousness
is not a Latin American characteristic. The lack of
security safeguards must necessarily limit the ex-
change of intelligence obtained covertly by any of
the nations involved, and particularly the United
States, which has the most sophisticated system and
hence the greatest need for protection.
The governments of some countries, of which
Guatemala is a good example, have little desire to
develop a competent career security service. There
is a fear that the existence of an efficient service
would constitute a threat to further activities of
members of the existing governments at such time as
they might find themselves out of power. Moreover,
many Latin American intelligence services display
a tendency to yield to the temptation to label as
"subversives" those of their own nationals resident
in other countries who are opposed to the existing
SECRET
-4-
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 6
SECRET
government. These considerations limit the possi-
bilities of large-scale multilateral cooperation
in the intelligence field.
2. Current Exchange Arrangements
Jusert
E from
Page 3
At present there is little or no organized ex-
change of intelligence among the Latin American na-
tions. There is a limited amount of informal ex-
change, often on a basis of personal relationships
of government officials having a community of in-
terest with respect to a particular matter.
The Central Intelligence Agency has established
working liaison arrangements in some Latin American
countries where such relations have been considered to
be in the best interest of the United States. Most
of the intelligence concerning subversion in Latin
America available to the CIA is derived from covert
operations or through contacts with another intelli-
gence or security service. This inhibits the pass-
age of such information to agencies of a third coun-
try. There is, however, a substantial amount of
intelligence available from overt or non-sensitive
sources which can be provided to other countries.
-5-
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 7
SECRET
In 1962, for example, CIA received information re-
ports from 26 services with which liaison is main-
tained in Latin America and released reports to 35
recipients. Intelligence items exchanged included
collated studies, weekly intelligence reviews, name
traces and travel reports.
The U.S. Army, through its attaches, currently
has an informal arrangement involving bilateral ex-
changes of intelligence with Argentina, Colombia,
Ecuador, Uruguay, Peru, Paraguay and Venezuela. In-
formation provided by the Army has been concerned
with subversive personalities, communist infiltra-
tion, weapons movements and related matters. Re-
ciprocal intelligence received has been of minimal
value. The Army also provides selected informa-
tion on subversive activities to Brazil, Chile,
Guatemala and Mexico, although there is no recip-
rocal arrangement. The attaches of other U.S.
Services practice limited exchange on a selective
basis.
Some information has been released from time to
time to Latin American countries by the Commander-in-
Chief, Caribbean Command, operating through the
Military Groups.
-6-
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 8
SECRET
As yet, however, the program for the provision by
United States agencies of information on subversion
to Latin American governments has not been developed
to an adequate degree. Since the United States
possesses the great acquisition capabilities,
as well as the only secure and reliable means of
rapid communication throughout Latin America (current-
ly in process of improvement), the development of an
integrated United States system for bilateral ex-
change offers the greatest possibility of achieving
the results desired. United States experience in
the matter of intelligence exchange in Latin America
and in other areas of the world has led to the
conclusion that bilateral arrangements are more
fruitful than multilateral arrangements such as
those established within the framework of NATO,
CENTO and SEATO. Nevertheless, this experience
has shown also that multilateral arrangements can
be of some use, particularly in creating an aware-
ness of the need for intelligence exchange.
The concept of an exchange of information among
members of the OAS with regard to subversive activities
has been put forward on numerous occasions at OAS
-7-
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 9
SECRET
Statak
Contribution
Inter-American meetings, but has not been implemented,
largely for the reasons set forth in section II.1.
Under the Punta del Este decisions the OAS members were
urged to cooperate in strengthening their capacity to
counteract threats or sets of aggression, subversion or
other dangers to peace and security. The Council of
the OAS is charged with maintaining vigilance over
Castro-communist subversion and a "Special Consultative
Committee on Security (SCCS)" is established to give
technical advice to governments and the Council on
request on matters relating to subversion. All American
governments have been asked to furnish information on
Castro-Communist activities to serve as the basis for
studies and recommendations by the Council of the OAS on
how to counteract them. Since the Punta del Este meeting
the OAS has been making slow, but steady, progress in
this field, which the Latin American countries continue
to regard as primarily one of domestic jurisdiction.
This brief summary serves to illustrate that there
is much room for expansion of bilateral intelligence
exchange arrangements among the Latin American
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 10
SECRET
and other Inter-American meetings, commencing with
the Inter-American Conference at Bogota in 1948.
At Punta del Este in 1962, OAS members were urged
to cooperate in strengthening their capacity to
counteract threats or acts of aggression, subversion
or other dangers to peace and security. More
recently, the Council of the OAS established the
"Special Consultative Committee on Security (SCCS)"
to consider the specific resolutions on security
problems adopted at Punta del Este. The SCCS has
requested all American governments to furnish in-
formation on Castro-Communist activities to serve
as the basis for studies and recommendations by the
OAS on the nature of the threat and means of dealing
with it.
These actions by the OAS have yielded little
or nothing in terms of concrete results. The in-
dividual Latin American countries have shown little
inclination to proceed with implementing actions
pursuant to the resolutions adopted.
This brief summary serves to illustrate that
there is much room for expansion of bilateral in-
telligence exchange arrangements among the Latin
-8-
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 11
SECRET
American nations themselves, which is now minimal
at best, as well as a need to create an expanded
program for bilateral intelligence exchange be-
tween the United States and individual countries,
and finally, a requirement to exploit the possibili-
ties of a multilateral approach within the recog-
nized limitations involved.
III. Actions Recommended
1. Increase the existing bilateral exchange of in-
telligence conducted by CIA, DOD, and other US Agencies
where it is found possible to establish appropriate
arrangements for the exchange of selected information
consistent with security requirements.
2. Establish intelligence centers at Caribbean Com-
mand and Caribbean Sea Frontier headquarters for fur-
ther dissemination of intelligence as appropriate in
conjunction with the Military Alerting System, for
rapid processing and dissemination of intelligence on
subversive activity directly to the countries concerned
through the American embassies therein.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 12
-9-
SECRET
3. Increase and expedite the existing flow of in-
telligence on subversion from CIA and the other ele-
ments of the American Embassies in Latin America to
Caribbean Command as well as to CIA headquarters for
further dissemination as appropriate.
4. Increase the dissemination to Latin American
governments, by all US agencies concerned, of unclassi-
fied studies, reports and other non-sensitive informa-
tion concerning Communist subversion.
5. Encourage Latin American countries to engage in
bilateral exchange of intelligence on Communist sub-
versive activities.
6. Continue the development at high priority of U.S.
communications in Latin America.
7. Increase emphasis on the provision of U.S. in-
telligence advisors to Latin American countries.
8. Intensify and increase existing AID, CIA, and
Military programs for the training and equipping of
Latin American internal security and intelligence ser-
vices. Establish such programs in additional countries
where it is found to be in the best interests of the
United States and acceptable to the country concerned.
SECRET
-10-
NW 50955 DocId:32423994 Page 13
SECRET
9. Undertake action in the OAS to stimulate
governments to keep the Council and the SCCS fully
informed on a continuing basis of the nature and incidence
of subversive activities in their respective countries.
SECRET
-11-
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 14
SECRET
9. Undertake action in the OAS to establish a
standing committee of representatives of intelligence
and security services for the purpose of receiving,
processing, and disseminating information on Cuban-
Communist subversive activities. (It is visualized
that this committee would perform, on a continuing
basis, functions similar to those undertaken by the
Special Consultative Committee on Security (SCCS),
but would not serve as an intelligence center for the
immediate processing and dissemination of intelligence).
Introduce
I ADB in to intemal secunty problem
Solutiottar intell advions A
SECRET
-11-
NW 50955 DocId: 32423994 Page 15