198-10007-10017
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10007-10017
CALIFANO PAPERS
RECORD SERIES :
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
ORIGINATOR:
ARMY
Document Information
FROM:
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
TO :
ICCCA
TITLE:
ICCCA: FIRST PROGRESS REPORT, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
DATE:
PAGES:
04/17/1963
10
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
IMPEDING TRAVEL TO CUBA
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
1C; 4
Redact
04/02/1998
Califano Papers, Box 4, Folder 18. Memo from Califano to Wheeler, Zumwalt, Abrams, Wendt,
Carpenter and Elwood re: the First Progress Report of the Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 1
JFK Review
Department of the Army EO 13526
Declassify Exclude Exempt
Authority
Refer To
Review Date 8/12/2015 By KES
26
SECRET
April 17, 1963
MEMORANDUM NO. 31 FOR GENERAL EARLE G. WHEELER (JCS)
SUBJECT:
CAPTAIN E. R. ZUMWALT, JR., USN (OSD)
MAJOR GENERAL C. W. ABRAMS, JR., USA
REAR ADMIRAL W. WENDT, USN
MAJOR GENERAL J. W. CARPENTER, IL, USAT
BRIGADIER GENERAL H. M. ELWOOD, USMC
First Progress Report, Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion
Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affaiset
Attached for your information is a copy of the First Progress Report
prepared by the Subcommittee on Subversion of subject Committee
Attachmen
As Stated
cc:
Mr. Califano
LtCol Patchell
ASG
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
Special Assistant to the
Secretary of the Army
Ед" МА но е ٢١ ۸۹
УМЯА ЭНТ ЧО
701130
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
9527
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 2
DECE
SECRET
SUB-COMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
30 March 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR THE INTERDEPARTMENTAL COORDINATING
SUBJECT:
COMMITTEE ON CUBAN AFFAIRS
First Progress Report, Sub-Committee on Cuban
Subversion
ENCLOSURE: Progress Achieved in Impeding Travel to Cuba
1. On 8 March the President approved certain actions proposed to
combat Castro-Communist subversion in Latin America. Subsequently,
the related departments and agencies undertook to execute those
decisions. This is the first report of progress achieved.
2. The three-week period covered by the report has been sufficient
to set the program in motion and to bring about the following principal
developments, which come within the purview of the sub-committee:
!
a. In addition to the program on control of subversive travel,
approved by the President on 8 March, four companion action pro-
grams have also been completed and forwarded for approval,
covering the movements of arms, the movement of propaganda
materials, the exchange of intelligence, and surveillance of the
Caribbean.
b. Action programs on the control of the movement of funds
for subversive purposes and the training of Latin Americans in
the United States are in preparation.
c. Preparations have been made, including the development of
a set of action objectives, for use in the ministerial meeting on
security in Managua on 3 April.
d. Tangible progress is evident in the effort to impede and
monitor the travel of subversives through Mexico. That country,
as a result of efforts by the Department of State and the Central
SECRET
GROUP-1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
SECRET
Intelligence Agency, is now taking informal, though useful, steps
to regulate travel to and from Cuba, and has agreed to prohibit
the introduction by Cubana Airlines of Russian-made aircraft on
the Mexico-Havana route.
3. Specific actions taken to date by each department and agency
concerned are summarized in the enclosure. Subsequent reports will
be submitted on the first day of each month. These reports will cover
further progress achieved in the now on-going program to control
subversive travel, and in implementing decisions, as they are taken,
on the additional anti-subversion programs which have been submitted
by the sub-committees for approval.
For the Sub-Committee:
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 4
V. H. KRULAK
Major General, USMC
Chairman
2
SECRET
PROGRESS ACHIEVED IN IMPEDING TRAVEL TO CUBA
1. The Department of State has:
a. Determined that a Committee of the Council of the
Organization of American States has prepared a program
of travel control measures which will be recommended for
implementation to member governments within the next
several weeks.
b. Consulted our Ambassador in Mexico concerning the
possibility of institution by that country of adminis-
trative procedures to delay, or otherwise make difficult,
The Ambassador has
the carrying of passengers to Cuba.
reported that essentially all feasible control measures,
short of discontinuing Cubana flights, are being taken
by the Mexican government.
c. Determined that Mexico is now requiring that visas
for Cuba be placed securely in passports of all travelers
departing for that country, and is stamping passports to
indicate that a person has departed or arrived from Cuba.
d. Determined that Mexico is prepared to furnish
manifests of all carriers departing for or arriving
from Cuba to Latin American countries which request them.
e. Forwarded a memorandum to the President recom-
mending that we seek action in the Council of the
Organization of American States to prohibit Latin American
ships from serving Cuba and to prohibit member countries
from granting overflight or landing rights to Soviet
aircraft.
permi
f. Persuaded Mexico, through the good offices of
Senator Mansfield, to refuse to permit Cubana Airlines
to employ Soviet-made Ilyushin 18 aircraft on the
Havana-Mexico route.
g. Pursued arrangements for a conference at Managua
on 3 April, to be attended by representatives of the
Isthmian states and the United States, for the purpose
of considering measures to control Castro-Communist
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 5
SECRET
subversive activities to include development of action
topics for presentation at the meeting as well as prepa-
ration of background material for the U.S. delegates.
!
h. Informed Venezuela, Colombia, Jamaica, Trinidad
and the Dominican Republic of plans to consult with
Isthmian countries at the San Jose Conference in regard
to increasing the Caribbean surveillance effort with U.S.
training and material support, and stated U.S. willing-
ness to provide similar assistance to the countries.
addressed. Replies from Trinidad and Venezuela have been
negative. Other countries have not yet responded.
2. The Department of Defense has:
a. Continued U.S. air and sea surveillance of the area
surrounding Cuba.
0
b. Continued the improvement of communications in
Latin America by: (1) installation of a multi-channel
radio station in Costa Rica, (2) continuing work on a
similar facility in Nicaragua, (3) continuing negotia-
tions for installation of military radio facilities in
Honduras, Colombia and Ecuador, (4) commencing installa-
tion of a submarine cable between Fort Sherman, Canal
Zone, and Jamaica, to be completed about 1 April, (5)
leasing six channels in this cable for communication
between the U.S. and the Canal Zone, and (6) making minor
improvements in radio facilities previously installed
in Bolivia and Guatemala.
c. Initiated a study, to be completed during the first
week in April, on the feasibility and desirability of
establishing intelligence centers at Caribbean Command
and Caribbean Sea Frontier Headquarters for rapid pro-
cessing and dissemination to countries concerned, via
the American Ambassadors, of the intelligence on the
movement of subversives.
d. Directed establishment of a U.S. military alerting
system for the Caribbean area, by which intelligence on
subversive movement can be rapidly transmitted to United
States Ambassadors in countries concerned. CINCARIB
has sufficient communication facilities to initiate the
system, and improvement of these facilities is continu-
ing.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 6
2
SECRET
e. Developed modified military assistance guidance to
provide selected countries with necessary small patrol
craft, training and logistical support for patrol of their
coasts.
f. Taken the following actions to provide training
assistance as required to improve coastal patrol capa-
bilities of Latin American military forces:
(1) Commenced appraisal of a proposal by CINCARIB
to establish a Small Craft Training and Inspection
Facility in the Canal Zone.
(2) Established liaison with the Coast Guard in
regard to training assistance. The Coast Guard has
stated that it can provide a Mobile Training Team,
as an interim measure, and can loan two 40-foot utility
boats for training in the Canal Zone until replacement
craft are provided under the Military Assistance
Program.
3. The Central Intelligence Agency has:
a. Informed 21 stations in Latin America of the program
approved by the President and designated a Senior Officer
at each station to supervise implementation at highest
priority.
b. Intensified efforts throughout Latin America to
discourage travel to Cuba. Progress in each country is
summarized as follows:
(1) Argentina: Station has urged the local security
service to reintroduce travel impediments, such as a
requirement that good-conduct certificates be obtained
before leaving the country; and is attempting to per-
suade the Argentines to stamp passports "not valid for
travel to Cuba". Liaison services appear mildly recep-
tive. Advance information on Cuban travel by Argentines
through Mexico will be sought from that country.
have been made to send two agents to Cuba to seek in-
formation on the mechanics of travel. Propaganda against
Cuba subversion is being intensified.
Plans
(2) Bolivia: Efforts to discourage travel to Cuba
through liaison with the Bolivian government have been
unsuccessful. The station is concentrating on the
penetration of Castro-Communist groups.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424010 Page 7
3
SECRET
(3) Brazil: Because of Government policy, efforts
through the Brazilian National Government have shown
little promise. The Station is working through the
armed forces and friendly State security services to
arrange travel impediments as feasible. The possi-
bility of requiring State good-conduct certificates
prior to travel is being explored. Propaganda assets
are being utilized by the Station to support its
actions.
(4) Chile: Station is attempting to persuade the
Chilean Government to limit travel on Chilean pass-
ports to countries specified before departure.
Clandestine collection of information on travel to
Cuba is being intensified.
(5) Colombia: Through local services, and covertly..
through the Foreign Office, the Station is exploring
means of impeding travel to Cuba. Arrangements have
been made for passing selected information on travel
to the Colombians. Coverage of Colombian-Cuban
institutions and attempts to identify and interrogate
Colombians who have traveled to Cuba are being ex-
panded.
(6) Costa Rica: Station is making arrangements
to pass information on Cuba travelers to the Costa
Rican Government on a regular basis and to provide
guidance and covert support.
(7) Dominican Republic:
Both the President and
the Security Service have been approached in regard
to preventing travel to Cuba, and both seem willing
to cooperate fully.
(8) Ecuador: Since the Government of Ecuador makes
little effort to control travel to Cuba, the Station
is relying on covert assets, including some in the
police, to impede and harass travelers. Efforts
continue to persuade the government to take restric-.
tive measures.
(9) El Salvador:
Station liaison has resulted
in the arrest of several returnees from Cuba.
Informal arrangements already exist for denying or
delaying exit permits to persons going to Cuba and
for harassing returnees.
SECRET
4
NW 50955 DocId:32424010 Page 8
(10) Guatemala: Efforts to identify illegal
travelers and methods employed have been increased.
Arrangements have been made to facilitate proces-
sing of travel information received from Mexico.
(11) Haiti: The status of our relations with the
Duvalier Government has precluded cooperation.
Station has instructed assets to report Cuban travel
information.
(12) Honduras: The Station has proposed to the
Ministry of the Interior a travel control system,
including card indices. Unilateral assets have
intensified intelligence collection efforts related
to travel with a view to passing selected information to the
President and the Security Police. Names of returnees
from Cuba will be screened and an effort made to
expand patrols on the north coast.
(13) Jamaica: The Jamaican Government already
effectively controls travel to and from Cuba. A
travel control program has been discussed with
Jamaican security officials, who will cooperate.
(14) Mexico: Station has arranged for harassment
of Cuba travelers and for stamping passports to show
travel to Cuba. Airport travel lists are obtained
and passed to other stations.
Efforts are being
intensified to identify disaffected travelers who
might provide information.
(15) Nicaragua: Station is pressing efforts.
to develop travel information.
(16) Panama: Arrangements have been made to
interview at least ten persons who have returned
from Cuba. Station will pass selected information
to Panamanian officials.
(17) Paraguay: The Paraguayan Government already
discourages travel by threat of arrest, questioning
and surveillance. Station has emphasized the
potential threat of Cuban subversive activities
with good results.
(18) Peru: A Peruvian source recently returned
from insurgency training in Cuba has been developed
and is providing valuable intelligence.
The
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424010 Page 9
5
SECRET
possibility of harassing and impeding travelers to
Cuba has been discussed with Peruvian officials.
Efforts to promote greater cooperation are being
made, to include passing of selected information.
(19) Trinidad: Station will attempt to collect
information on travel and seek cooperation of local
security service, although the attitude of the
government in regard to establishing a travel con-
trol program is not highly promising.
(20) Uruguay: Uruguayan law permits travel to any
country. Clandestine assets have agreed to arrange,
on request, administrative delays of as much as two
months. A plan is being developed to pass derogatory
information to the Mexican Ambassador on prospective
travelers to Cuba via Mexico. Argentine travellers
using false passports have been identified.
(21) Venezuela: The need to improve travel con-
trols has been impressed upon Venezuelan security
services. Station has influenced the Venezuelan
Government to establish a commission to study
Colombian border crossing controls. Establishment
of a special frontier police organization is under
consideration. Station regularly exchanges infor-
mation with local security services and is expand-
ing efforts to obtain travel information.
4. The U. S. Information Agency has;
a. Issued News Policy Notes providing guidance to
public information media designed to further attain-
ment of the following objectives:
(1) Alert the Hemisphere to the dangers of
subversive training in Cuba of nationals of other
countries,
(2) Discredit those who have received sub-
versive training,
(3) Discourage prospective trainees, and
(4) Impress Latin American governments and
peoples with the need to halt travel to Cuba.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424010 Page 10
6
SECRET
b. Initiated preparation of a Circular Instruction
to the Field, based on the News Policy Notes mentioned
above; to be completed by 3 April 1963.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424010 Page 11
7