1
198-10004-10053
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10004-10053
RECORD SERIES :
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
ARMY
FROM:
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
TO:
ICCCA
TITLE:
ICCCA: EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSION
ACTIVITIES
DATE:
PAGES:
03/25/1963
27
SUBJECTS:
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE - OAS MEMBER STATES
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
1B
Redact
10/07/1997
Califano, Box 6, Folder 10. Memo from Califano to Wheeler, Zumwalt, Abrams, Wendt, Carpenter,
and Elwood concerning a proposal for shared intelligence among OAS member states.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32276038 Page 1
JFK Review
Department of the Army EO 13526
Declassify Exclude Exempt
Authority
Refer To
Review Date RAUGIS By
1
OSA 350.09 Cuba 3/26/63
FW 3/15/63
OF DEFEN
S
DEPARTMENT OF
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
SEGRET
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
MEMORANDUM FOR MR. JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
IN REPLY REFER TO
Op-605F/wm
26 March 1963
Subj: Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban
Affairs: The Exchange of Intelligence Concerning
Communist Subversive Activities
1.
Reference is made to your Memorandum number 22, subject
as above, dated 25 March 1963.
2.
The paper is satisfactory to the Navy subject to the
following change:
Page 4, paragraph 3c, last line, change to read as follows:
"naviesy-the-Mexican-Navy and the US Navy."
REASON: Mexico has advised that the Navy-to-Navy program
cannot be ratified in view of conflict with domestic law.
appears unlikely, therefore, that Mexico will contribute to
the program on the level indicated.
It
WFA WENDT
Director, Strategic Plans Division
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
OSA, ASG Control No. 762AFFLE
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 2
If so
song
SECRET
SECRET
RTMENT OF DEFEN
DEPA
UNITED STATES OF AMERICAX
SECRET
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 25, D.C.
OSA 350.09-CUBA
3/28/63
FW 3/15/63
JCSM-255-63、
28 MAR 1963/
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
Subject: Exchange of Intelligence Concerning
Communist Subversive Activities (C)
1. This memorandum responds to CSAM 135-63, dated 25 March
1963, subject as above.
2. The paper attached to CSAM 135-63 concerning the exchange
of intelligence on communist sabversive activities has been reviewed
by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. It is considered to be a satisfactory response
to the specific problem of exchanging intelligence on communist sub-
versive activities among aations of the Organization of American States,
subjeen to the following modification:
Page 4, subparagraph II 5 et Add the following to the end
of the paragraph:
"The US Air Force, through its attaché systems
in Latia America, likewise has an exchange program.
This is accomplished on an informal basis and is bilaterai
in nature.
6 of 9......
Copy of
... pages series
Copies each
"A"
OSA, ASG Central K078 66
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 3
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
SIGNED
SECRET
FILE
A. H. MANHART
Major General, USA
Deputy Director, Joint Staff
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
REGRADING; DOD DIR 5200.10
DOES NOT APPLY
J
SECRET
March 25, 1
OSA
350.09
3/25/63
MAJOR GENERALO. V. ABRAMS, JR., USA
CAPTAIN E. R. ZUMFALT, JB., USN (OGD)
MEMORANDUM NO. 28 FOR GENERAL BARLE O. WHEELER (JCS)
ADMIRAL W. VENDT, UN
MAJOR GENERAL J. W. CARPENTER, DI, USAF
The Exchange of Istelligence Concerning Com
SUBJECT: Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affairo
DRIGADIER GEHALAL H. M. ELWOOD, USMC
sive Activities
for comment on March 14, 1963, was zedralied.
hobe Central Intelligence Agency the paper forwarded to you
prepared by the Subcommittee on Subversion of subject Curmittes. As
Attached is a final draft copy of paper on Exchange of Intelligenca
It is requestedighat your commer
requested that tha viove of the Organization of the Jofat Chiato
10 than 1800 hours on March 30, 1965. Additi
will be the last opportunity to comment on this paper before it tur
Include the views of the Director, Dofosse Intelligawan Aghay.
0
to the President.
Attachment
Signed
As Stated
Mr. Adam Yaramadinsky
file (m
OSA, ASG Control No. 222-FILE SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 4
ГЕСЬ УКА
१०
OFFICE
Jre
Joseph A. Califano, J
Joseph A. Califano, Ir.
Special Assistant to the
Secretary of the Army
425
ЯАН
OLLICE
DIALULCHE
cc: Mr. Califano
FW
3/15/63
ASG
Lt. Col. Patchell
DECLASSIFIED AFTER 12 YEARS
DOWNGRADED AT 3 YEAR INTERVALS
DOD DIR 5200.10
SECRET
SECRET
CUBA
THE EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 5
!
GROUP-1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSI-
FICATION
SECRET
CUBA
THE EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
I.
Introduction
In combatting Castro-Communist subversion through-
out Latin America, there is a fundamental requirement
for intelligence
a requirement which involves the
timely acquisition and processing of information as
well as its rapid dissemination, on a selective basis,
to countries concerned. While efforts are now being
made by CIA, AID, and the US Military Services to
improve Latin American intelligence systems, success
thus far has been limited, and much remains to be done.
It is not with this broad problem, however, that this
paper is primarily concerned, but rather with the
narrower matter of the need for a stronger program of
exchanging essential information regarding Communist
subversion in Latin America among those who need to
know it.
II. The Nature and Scope of the Problem
1. Limiting Factors
a. There are many inhibitions which tend to
discourage the exchange of intelligence on an
international basis, even among allies. National
privacy with regard to the inner workings of an
intelligence system must be preserved. Com-
pounding the problem further, where Latin America
is concerned, is the divisive influence of the
long history of rivalries, wars, jealousies and
disputes which have characterized relations among
the nations concerned. The wounds of past conflicts
among pairs and groupings of nations are not com-
pletely healed. There is lingering hostility
between Peru and Ecuador deriving from their
boundary war. Chile and Bolivia continue at
odds over the Rio Lauca and the question of
Bolivian access to the sea, and, even now,
Nicaraguan insurgents are harbored within the
borders of both Costa Rica and Honduras.
could hardly be expected that these countries
would be eager to exchange intelligence on a full
and frank basis.
It
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 6
SECRET
b. Beyond this, Latin America is not a homo-
geneous entity in social, political, or economic
terms, and attitudes toward the Castro-Communist
subversive menace vary widely. A completely
unified approach toward exchange of intelligence
concerning this menace, therefore, cannot be
regarded as attainable.
c. Additional impediments to intelligence ex-
change are the generally low level of competence
of most Latin American intelligence services, their
lack of rapid, secure means of communication, the
absence of adequate security systems, and the lack
of security consciousness.
Deficiencies in
security safeguards must necessarily limit the
exchange of intelligence obtained covertly by any
of the nations involved, and particularly the
United States, which has the most sophisticated
system and hence the greatest need for protection.
d. These defects promise to persist, since the
governments of some countries have little desire to
develop a competent career security service. There
is a fear that the existence of an efficient service
would constitute a threat to further activities of
members of the existing governments at such time
as they might find themselves out of power. More-
over, many Latin American intelligence services
tend to label as "subversives" those of their own
nationals resident in other countries who are
opposed to the existing government.
It
e. These realities all underscore the fact that
multilateral intelligence exchange must be
approached on a most circumscribed basis.
should not be concluded, however that nothing
of value can be accomplished multilaterally.
With proper definition, limiting the problem
of exchange to matters directly related to communist
subversive activities, such as the movement to and
from Cuba of subversives, the production and
movement of propaganda materials which threaten
internal stability, the movement of arms, and the
movement of funds, it should be practicable to
marshal a useful measure of cooperation.
In
pursuing this effort, it will be important to
draw a sharp distinction between secret intelligence
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 7
2
SECRET
gained by covert means and information obtained
openly. The former involves the requirement to
protect national secrets both as to sources and
acquisition methods employed. The latter, which
can be of great value, can be exchanged without
fear of compromise.
2. Categories of Exchangeable Intelligence
The following describe generally the categories
of exchangeable matter, and exemplify the types of material
under each:
a. Travel information Unevaluated information
devoted solely to rapid reporting of the movement
of individuals between Latin America and Cuba or
Soviet Bloc countries. Such reports can be
reduced to a few elements such as identification
of the individual, point of departure, date and
time of departure or arrival, destination, and
carrier. When presented in an abbreviated form
such information offers minimum security problems
with respect to exchange with one or more countries.
Un-
b. Intelligence information reports
evaluated information derived from clandestine
collection operations or confidential sources
reporting on plans and activities of Cuban or
communist connected subversive individuals or
groups; on movement of arms, propaganda and funds;
on shipping and air movements and on results of
surveillance efforts. Because continued receipt
of such information by the United States. is dependent
on careful protection of sources and methods of
collection, the exchange of this information with
other countries must be carefully controlled by
the collecting department.
c. Intelligence reports and studies - Evaluated
intelligence in all of the above areas, prepared
by an appropriate element of the US government in
a form which is releaseable to other Latin American
countries.
d. Selected overt materials Articles or news
stories drawn from press, periodical and other
overt publishers. Selected for maximum impact on
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 8
3
SECRET
other countries particularly where such infor-
mation is not freely available to security services,
as in the case of foreign broadcast reports.
3. Current Exchange Arrangements
a. At present there is little organized ex-
change of intelligence among the Latin American
nations. There is a limited amount of informal
exchange, often on a basis of personal relation-
ships between government officials having a
community of interest with respect to a particular
matter.
b. The Central Intelligence Agency has estab-
lished working liaison arrangements in those
Latin American countries where such relations have
been considered to be in the best interest of the
United States. Most of the intelligence concerning
subversion in Latin America available to the CIA is
derived from covert operations or through contacts
with another intelligence or security service.
This inhibits the passing of such information to
agencies of a third country. There is, however, a
substantial amount of intelligence available from
overt or non-sensitive sources which can be pro-
vided to other countries. In 1962, CIA received
information reports from 26 services with which
liaison is maintained in Latin America and released
reports to 35 recipients. Intelligence items
exchanged included collated studies, weekly intelli-
gence reviews, name traces and travel reports.
c. The US Army, through its attaches, currently
has an informal arrangement involving bilateral
exchanges of intelligence with Argentina, Colombia,
Ecuador, Uruguay, Peru, Paraguay and Venezuela.
Information provided by the Army has been concerned
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 9
4
SECRET
d. Exchanges of information are also effected
from time to time through channels of the Depart-
ment of State.
e. As yet, however, the program for the pro-
vision by United States agencies of information on
subversion to Latin American governments has not
been developed to an adequate degree. Since the
United States possesses the most extensive
acquisition capabilities, as well as the only
secure and reliable means of rapid communication
throughout Latin America (currently in process
of improvement), the development of an integrated
United States system for bilateral exchange offers
the greatest possibility of achieving the results
desired.
f. United States experience in the matter of
intelligence exchange in Latin America, and in
other areas of the world, has led to the conclusion
that bilateral arrangements are more fruitful than
multilateral arrangements such as those established
within the framework of NATO, CENTO and SEATO.
Nevertheless, this experience has shown also that
multilateral arrangements can be of some use,
particularly in creating an awareness of the need
for intelligence exchange.
g. The concept of an exchange of information
among members of the OAS with regard to subversive
activities has been put forward at numerous Inter-
American meetings, but has not been implemented,
largely for the reasons set forth in Section II. 1.
Under the Punta del Este decisions, the OAS members were
urged to cooperate in strengthening their capacity
to counteract threats or acts of aggression,
subversion or other dangers to peace and security.
The Council of the OAS is charged with maintaining
vigilance over Castro-Communist subversion, and
a
"Special Consultative Committee on Security (SCCS)"
is established to give technical advice on request
to governments and the Council on matters relating
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 10
5
SECRET
to subversion. Since the Punta del Este meeting,
the OAS has been making slow progress in the
countersubversion field, but there has as yet been
no significant exchange of intelligence through
its machinery.
h. The Inter-American Defense Board (IADB) has
also demonstrated an awareness of the need for
exchanging intelligence regarding communist sub-
version. Annex 4 of the General Military Plan
prepared by the IADB requests the American States to
report information to the Board and to establish
agreements among themselves for exchanging infor-
mation of collective interest. The United States
has approved the General Military Plan, but similar
action has not been taken by all member countries.
i. This brief summary serves to illustrate that
there is much room for expansion of bilateral in-
telligence exchange arrangements among the Latin
American nations themselves, which is now minimal
at best, as well as a need to create an expanded
program for bilateral intelligence exchange between
the United States and individual countries, and
finally, a requirement to develop the possibilities
of a multilateral approach within the recognized
limitations involved.
III. Existing Programs
Enumerated below are the principal programs now in
progress. They are subject to continuing improvement.
1. Bilateral exchange of intelligence is now being
conducted by CIA, DOD, and other US agencies with their
Latin American counterparts in instances where it has
been found possible to establish appropriate arrangements
for exchange of selected information consistent with
security requirements.
2. A study is currently underway to evaluate the
feasibility and desirability of establishing military
intelligence centers of the Caribbean Command and the
Caribbean Sea Frontier, Atlantic Command, for further
dissemination of intelligence as appropriate in con-
junction with our Military Alerting System, for rapid
processing and dissemination when appropriate, of
intelligence on subversive activities directly to the
countries concerned through the US Ambassador.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 11
6
SECRET
3. Intelligence is being provided to the Caribbean
Command by CIA and other elements of the US Embassies
in Latin America as well as to CIA Headquarters for
further dissemination as appropriate.
4. Various agencies of the US Government are now
disseminating to Latin American governments unclassi-
fied studies and reports and other non-sensitive
information concerning Castro-Communist subversion.
5. US Government communications systems through-
out Latin America are being expanded and improved upon
on a high priority basis.
6. Programs now exist under AID, CIA, and DOD for
the training and equipping of Latin American internal
security and intelligence services. Additional programs
could be established in other countries where it is
found to be in the best interests of the United States and
acceptable to the country concerned.
7. All information received by CIA concerning
travel to and from Cuba is put into a computer system
capable of producing lists by name, by country, by point
of travel, or sorted on various other bases.
IV. New Actions Recommended
1. Reinforce the present procedures for bilateral
exchange of intelligence, as described in Section III. 1.
by recommending that the US Ambassadors utilize the
existing Country Team mechanisms as an intelligence
advisory committee to coordinate procedures for ensuring
timeliness, completeness and freedom from duplication
or false confirmation in the bilateral exchange with
the host governments.
2. Encourage Latin American countries to engage
in bilateral exchange of intelligence on Castro-
Communist subversive activities.
3. Arrange for the electrical dissemination to
appropriate Latin American governments of daily
summaries of radio broadcast material as monitored by
the FBID of CIA.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 12
7
SECRET
4. Make available to as many countries as security
permits, sanitized results of the extensive travel
coverage obtained by the Central Intelligence Agency,
already processed by machine. (See paragraph III. 7.)
5. Increase, where feasible, emphasis on the
provision of US intelligence advisors to Latin American
countries. Discourage the employment of intelligence
advisors from nations other than the United States
except in instances where the United States can arrange
to provide for the training and control of any third
country intelligence advisor.
6. Arrange for the preparation of periodic studies
of Castro-Communist subversion in Latin America which
can be disseminated to selected Latin American govern-
ments.
7. Undertake action in the OAS to stimulate govern-
ments to keep the Council and the SCCS fully informed
on a continuing basis of the nature and incidence of
subversive activities in their respective countries.
8. Encourage Latin American countries to approve
the General Military Plan of the Inter-American Defense
Board (IADB), and, in accordance with Annex 4 thereof,
furnish to the IADB intelligence information and
estimates concerning Castro-Communist subversive
activities.
9. Undertake action in the OAS to establish a
Security Intelligence Advisory Committee consisting of
senior representatives of the appropriate services of
each government to deal with all major aspects of sub-
versive activities in their respective countries, consider
new coordinated plans of action to counter and neutralize
subversion, and implement necessary actions to insure
the most effective and timely exchange of information
between the governments on subversive activities.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 13
8
SECRET
THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.
26718
25 March 1963
IXED STATES OFARER
THE JOINT STAFF
:
SUB-COMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
OSA 350.09 (3/25/63) .W. 3/15/63
Cuba
MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY
:
Subject: Intelligence Paper on Cuba
1. Attached is a copy of the final paper prepared by
my committee on the exchange of intelligence. It reflects
the changes proposed by CIA in our earlier agreed paper,
as well as amendments to the CIA proposals arising from
the meeting of my committee last Saturday.
2. The only change of significance proposed by CIA is
found on page 3, paragraph 2, "Categories of Exchangeable
Intelligence." This paragraph, as submitted by CIA, would
have seriously limited the kinds of intelligence which we
would exchange with our Latin friends, so much so as to
make the paper relatively insignificant.
At my meeting last Saturday we made the additions
which are underlined in red on page 3. Those additions
are designed to vitiate the adverse restrictions involved
in the CIA proposal. As you will see, the additions
characterize the categories of exchangeable intelligence
only as examples, and add, specifically, all of the intel-
ligence areas in which we are interested.
3. The remaining changes proposed by CIA were relatively
insignificant removal from the action category of certain
on-going programs and the addition of CIA's IBM computer
capability among the actions.
4. This paper, as you see it, was fully concurred in
by my committee, including the CIA man who, to my surprise,
agreed in the changes which broadened greatly the CIA
contribution. I have forwarded the paper to Cottrell.
V. H. KRULAK
Major General, USMC
Chairman
Attachment
OSA, ASG Control No. 7H9A HP
NW 50955 DocId:32276038
Page 14
SECRET
SECRET
15 MAR 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR: THE SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY.
SUBJECT: Subcommittee on Cuban Subversion Report of the Exchange
of Intelligence (U)
OSA 350.09-CUBA
3/15/63
FW
3/15/63
1. Reference is made to the Second Working Draft, Cuba, The
Exchange of Intelligence Concerning Communist Subversive Activities.
2. The Army Staff has reviewed referenced paper and although it
is felt that Section II is too long, it concurs in general with the
recommended actions. However, the following changes should be made:
a.
Page 2, change last sentence to read:
"A completely
金: 看
cannot be expected."
b. Page 3, omit second paragraph as superfluous.
c.
Page 6, second paragraph:
This entire paragraph should be deleted or the state-
ment proved since Army knows of no approved exchange of information
program between CINCARIBCOM and Latin American countries.
d. Page 7, first sentence second paragraph, change to read:
"The concept
meetings, but has not been fully
implemented although this subject has been included in intelligence brief-
ings presented at the regular meetings of the IADB Council of Delegates."
CREIGHTON W. ABRAMS, JR.
Major General, GS
Assistant Deputy Chief of
Staff for Military Operations
LE CHIEL OF 2LVEL
fli (m)
OSA, ASG Contrci No. 69743
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
LEC ZEC
SECACHED T
ACSI CCS 54-63
NW 50955 DocId: 32276038 Page 15
SECRET
MÁn 151963
MEMORANDUM NO. 19 FOR GENERAL EABLE G. WHEELER (JCS)
CAPTAIN E. R. JUMWALT, JR., UIN(OSD)
MAJOR GENERAL C. W. ABRAMS, JR., USA
REAR ADMIRAL W. WENDT, US24
MAJOR GENERAL J.W.CARPENTER, HI, USAI
BAIGADIER GENERAL H.M. RLWOOD, USMC
SUBJECT: Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee of Cuban Affair
Kuchange of Intelligence
Attached is the final draft of the paper on Exchange of
Intelligence concerning communist subversive activities pre-
parod by the fabcommitten on Fabversion of the subject committeo.
As indicated in Memorandum No. 15, It to requested
than 1500 hours on March 15, 1963. This will be the last opportunity
that your commente on this paper be submitted to me nos inter
to comment on this paper before it is presented to The President.
Attachncont
Signed
Joseph A. Calliano, Jr.
Special Assistant to the
Secretary of the Army
as stated
cc: Mr. Adam Yarmolinsky
Colonel Patchell
Colonel Freda
Mr. Califano
ASG
OSA, ASG Control No.
NW 50955 DocId: 32276038 Page 16
OSA 350.09
CUBA
3-15-63
KM
SECRET
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC REGRADING
DOD DIR 5200.10 DOES NOT APPLY
SECRET
SUB-COMMITTEE ON CUBAN SUBVERSION
15 March 1963
TO SERVICE, OSD AND JOINT STAFF CONTACT POINTS:
This is our final effort on the paper for
exchange of intelligence. Please give me your views
on the manuscript by 1500 today.
SECRET
OSA, ASG Control No.679H
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 17
V. H. KRULAK
Major General, USMC
GROUP-1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
SECRET
SECOND WORKING DRAFT
CUBA
THE EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
CONCERNING COMMUNIST SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
I.
Introduction
In combatting Castro-Communist subversion through-
out Latin America, there is a fundamental requirement for
intelligence a requirement which involves the timely
acquisition and processing of information as well as its
rapid dissemination, on a selective basis, to countries
concerned. While efforts are now being made by CIA, AID,
and the U.S. Military Services to improve Latin American
intelligence systems, success thus far has been limited,
and much remains to be done. It is not with this broad
problem, however, that this paper is primarily concerned,
but rather with the narrower matter of the need for a
stronger program of exchanging essential information re-
garding Communist subversion in Latin America among those
who need to know it.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 18
SECRET
II.
The Nature and Scope of the Problem
1. Limiting Factors
There are many inhibitions which tend to discourage
the exchange of intelligence on an international basis,
even among allies. National privacy with regard to the
inner workings of an intelligence system must be pre-
served. Compounding the problem further, where Latin
America is concerned, is the divisive influence of the
long history of rivalries, wars, jealousies and dis-
putes which have characterized relations among the
nations concerned. The wounds of past conflicts among
pairs and groupings of nations are not completely
healed.
There is lingering hostility between Peru and
Ecuador deriving from their boundary war. Chile and
Bolivia continue at odds over the question of Bolivian
access to the sea, and, even now, Nicaraguan insurgents
are harbored within the borders of both Costa Rica
and Honduras. It could hardly be expected that these
countries would be eager to exchange intelligence on
a full and frank basis.
Beyond this, Latin America is not a homogeneous en-
tity in social, political, or economic terms, and
attitudes toward the Castro-Communist subversive menace
vary widely. A completely unified approach toward
exchange or intelligence concerning this menace, there-
fore, cannot be regarded as attainable.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 19
2
SECRET
An additional impediment to intelligence exchange
is the low level of competence of most Latin American
intelligence services, their lack of rapid, secure
means of communication, and the absence of adequate
security systems and the lack of security conscious-
ness. Deficiencies in security safeguards must
necessarily limit the exchange of intelligence ob-
tained covertly by any of the nations involved, and
particularly the United States, which has the most
sophisticated system and hence the greatest need for
protection.
1
This defect promises to persist, since the
governments of some countries have little desire
to develop a competent career security service.
There is a fear that the existence of an efficient
service would constitute a threat to further activi-
ties of members of the existing governments at such
time as they might find themselves out of power.
Moreover, many Latin American intelligence services
tend to label as "subversives" those of their own
nationals resident in other countries who are opposed
to the existing government.
These realities all underscore the fact that
multilateral intelligence exchange must be approached
on a most circumscribed basis. It should not be
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 20
3
SECRET
concluded, however, that nothing of value can be
accomplished multilaterally. With proper defini-
tion, limiting the problem of exchange to matters
directly related to communist subversive activities,
such as the movement to and from Cuba of trainees,
the production and movement of propaganda materials
which threaten internal stability, and the movement
of arms, it should be practicable to marshal a useful
measure of cooperation. In pursuing this effort,
it will be important to draw a sharp distinction
between secret intelligence gained by covert means
and information obtained openly. The former in-
volves the requirement to protect national secrets
both as to sources and acquisition methods employed.
The latter, which can be of great value, can be
exchanged without fear of compromise.
2. Current Exchange Arrangements
At present there is little organized exchange of
intelligence among the Latin American nations.
There is a limited amount of informal exchange,
often on a basis of personal relationships between
government officials having a community of interest
with respect to a particular matter.
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 21
4
SECRET
The Central Intelligence Agency has established
working liaison arrangements in some Latin American
countries where such relations have been considered
to be in the best interest of the United States.
Most of the intelligence concerning subversion in
Latin America available to the CIA is derived from
covert operations or through contacts with another
intelligence or security service. This inhibits the
passage of such information to agencies of a third
country. There is, however, a substantial amount
of intelligence available from overt or non-sensitive
sources which can be provided to other countries.
In 1962, for example, CIA received information re-
ports from 26 services with which liaison is main-
tained in Latin America and released reports to 35
recipients. Intelligence items exchanged included
collated studies, weekly intelligence reviews, name
traces and travel reports.
The U.S. Army, through its attaches, currently
has an informal arrangement involving bilateral
exchanges of intelligence with Argentina, Colombia,
Ecuador, Uruguay, Peru, Paraguay and Venezuela.
Information provided by the Army has been concerned
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 22
5
SECRET
with subversive personalities, communist infiltra-
tion, weapons movements and related matters.
Reciprocal intelligence received has been of small
value. The Army also provides selected information
on subversive activities to Brazil, Chile, Guatemala
and Mexico, without reciprocation. The Navy has
established a Navy-to-Navy program for the exchange
of intelligence among nine South American navies, the
Mexican Navy and the U.S. Navy.
Some information has been released from time to
time to Latin American countries by the Commander-
in-Chief, Caribbean Command, operating through the
Military Groups, and exchanges of information are
also effected from time to time through channels
of the Department of State.
As yet, however, the program for the provision
by United States agencies of information on subver-
sion to Latin American governments has not been
developed to an adequate degree. Since the United
States possesses the most extensive acquisition
capabilities, as well as the only secure and re-
liable means of rapid communication throughout Latin
America (currently in process of improvement), the
development of an integrated United States system
for bilateral exchange offers the greatest possi-
bility of achieving the results desired.
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 23
6
SECRET
United States experience in the matter of intel-
ligence exchange in Latin America, and in other areas
of the world, has led to the conclusion that bilateral
arrangements are more fruitful than multilateral
arrangements such as those established within the
framework of NATO, CENTO and SEATO. Nevertheless,
this experience has shown also that multilateral
arrangements can be of some use, particularly in
creating an awareness of the need for intelligence
exchange.
The concept of an exchange of information among
members of the OAS with regard to subversive activi-
ties has been put forward at numerous Inter-American
meetings, but has not been implemented, largely for
the reasons set forth in Section II.1. Under the
Punta del Esta decisions, the OAS members were
urged to cooperate in strengthening their capacity
to counteract threats or acts of aggression, sub-
version or other dangers to peace and security.
The Council of the OAS is charged with maintaining
vigilance over Castro-Communist subversion, and a
"Special Consultative Committee on Security (SCCS)"
is established to give technical advice on request
to governments and the Council on matters relating
7
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 24
SECRET
to subversion. All American governments have been
asked to furnish information on Castro-Communist
activities to serve as the basis for studies and
recommendations by the Council of the OAS on how
to counteract them. Since the Punta del Esta meet-
ing, the OAS has been making slow progress in the
countersubversion field, but there has as yet been
no significant exchange of intelligence through its
machinery.
This brief summary serves to illustrate that
there is much room for expansion of bilateral in-
telligence exchange arrangements among the Latin
American nations themselves, which is now minimal
at best, as well as a need to create an expanded
program for bilateral intelligence exchange be-
tween the United States and individual countries,
and finally, a requirement to develop the possibili-
ties of a multilateral approach within the recog-
nized limitations involved.
NW 50955 DocId:32276038 Page 25
8
SECRET
III. Actions Recommended
1. Increase the existing bilateral exchange of in-
telligence conducted by CIA, DOD, and other U