198-10007-10002
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
RECORD NUMBER:
198-10007-10002
RECORD SERIES :
CALIFANO PAPERS
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
ARMY
FROM:
JOSEPH A. CALIFANO, JR.
ΤΟ:
GENERAL KRULAK
TITLE:
CUBA AS A BASE FOR SUBVERSION
DATE:
PAGES:
SUBJECTS:
02/14/1963
139
CUBAN SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret.
1C; 4
Redact
02/10/1998
Califano Papers, Box 1. Transmittal of report entitled "Cuba as a Base for Subversion" from Califano
to Krulak.
v9.1
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 1
Department of the Army EO 13526
Declassify
Authority
Refer To
Exclude Exempt
Review Date 12AUGS By
NO STATE OBJECTION
TO DECLASSIFICATION/
BY DATE 21/14/16
15
1
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
WASHINGTON, D.C.
14 February 1963
MEMORANDUM FOR GENERAL KRULAK:
This book will have to be held by you
on an EYES ONLY basis.
The 1700 meeting with Mr. Yarmolinsky
will be held in Mr. Vance's office.
Attachment
7585
V
Joseph A. Califano, Jr.
Special Assistant to the
Secretary of the Army
Room
3е733
NW 50955 DocId:32423995 Page 2
CAP SECRET - NO FOREIGN DISSEM
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CUBA AS A BASE FOR SUBVERSION
GENERAL
SNTE 85-4 62 (9 Nov 62)
PROPAGANDA
Prensa Latina and Printed Material
Havana's International Broadcasting
Personal Contact
U.S. Counter Effort
FUNDS
Bole Report of Evidence
Reports of Cuban Funds for Bubversion
TRAINING
Summary Report of Treining in Cube
Progran
Travel for Training
Activities Upon Return from Cuba
Miscellaneous
ARMS SHIPMITS - FROM CUBA
Methods of Operation
Reports of Arms Smuggling
COMMUNICATIONS
Electronic Communications
Documents
Couriers
Next Attached
TAB
6
SABOTAGE
7
Reports of Sabotage
Terrorist Activities
COMMUNIST ORGANIZATION FOR LATIN AMERICA
Cuban Relationships and Policies
Soviet Activities and Conflicts
Situation Reports
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 3
T
1234
1
2
12345
1
2
123
10
123
SECRET - NO FOREIGN DISSEM
UNCLASSIFIED
SUBVERSION -- Actions, which may or may not be inimical to
U.S. intereste, designed to undersine the military, economic, psycho-
logical, morale, or political strength of a constituted government.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 4
UNCLASSIFIED
SECRET
i
9. Nov 1962
SNIE 85-4-62
CASTRO'S SUBVERSIVE
CAPABILITIES IN LATIN
AMERICA
THE PROBLEM
To describe and evaluate Castro's capabilities, with Soviet help,
for carrying out subversion and sabotage in Latin America after
satisfaction of all US conditions relative to the withdrawal of
strategic weapons systems from Cuba and a consequent US com-
mitment not to invade.
NOTE: In this estimate we have considered Castro's raw capabilities,
taking note of, but not working out in detail, US and Latin
American capabilities for counteraction.
SUMMARY
A. The dangerously unstable situation that prevails through-
out much of Latin America is the product of fundamental in-
equities and historic circumstances; it is not the creation of
Castro and the Soviets. Castro's efforts, with Soviet help, το
exploit this situation by means of subversion and sabotage have
not produced significant results. Propaganda exploitation of
Castro and Cuba as symbols of revolution has probably beer more
effective to date than other subversive activities. Castres in-
fluence in Latin America had waned by the time of the missile
base crisis and was further reduced by the revelation that he
had accepted Soviet strategic missile bases on Cuban soil and
by the manner of the Soviet decision to withdraw them.
B. Implementation of an agreement between the US and the
USSR whereby the strategic weapons systems would be with-
drawn and the US committed not to intervene in Cuba with force
will leave Castro with a new immunity and a greater freedom
SECRET
1
f
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995
Page 5
SECRET
for subversive actions throughout Latin America. The extent
to which this potential is realized will depend upon the situation
in Cuba, Soviet policy toward Cuba, and the policies and perform-
ance of the other Latin American governments and of the US with
respect to the Castro threat.... There are many targets in the
hemisphere vulnerable to Castro-Communist subversion and sab
otage, and the Soviets are likely to assist Castro in reaching them
by contributing both to his security at home and to his capability
for action overseas. As in the period before the missile base
crisis, the effect of Castro's subversive activities will depend not
only upon his capabilities but upon the attractiveness of the
Cuban example and the willingness of the American governments
to take determined counteraction. This willingness will probably
be weakened by fulfillment of the US commitment not to invade
Cuba.
C. We have examined how Castro's subversive potential would
be affected by alternative courses of Soviet policy regarding Cuba:
(1) virtual withdrawal of support; (2) continuation of economic
and military support ranging from present up to substantially
increased levels. We believe that course (1) would considerably
reduce Castro's subversive potential, and that the Soviets are
unlikely to elect it. We conclude that Soviet course (2) would
maintain Castro's potential for subversive action at least at pres-
ent levels or actually raise it to the point where he could under-
take amphibious and/or airborne subversive operations against
close-in targets.
2
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 6
SECRET
THE ESTIMATE
I. CASTRO'S SUBVERSIVE ACTIVITIES BEFORE THE MISSILE BASE CRISIS ¹
Aims
1. From the time of his accession to power Fidel Castro has sought to
gain acceptance of the Cuban revolution as a model for others and of
himself as the leader of revolutionary forces throughout Latin America.
He has constantly sought to foment revolutions in other Latin American
States. Moreover, Castro has generally had the support of the Sino-
Soviet Bloc in the pursuit of these aims.
Means
2. Castro began his career of sponsorship for revolutions in Latin
America in 1959 with landings of small rebel forces in Nicaragua, Pan-
ama, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti. None of these were successful
and he turned to other means.
3. From the beginning, propaganda has been one of the principal in-
struments on which Castro has relied. In addition to the main trans-
missions of Radio Havana for external listeners, which have had a great
deal of revolutionary content, he has beamed special programs devised
to stimulate revolutionary action to each of half a dozen selected
countries. A major effort has been made through Prensa Latina, the
Cuban news service, to disseminate Castro-Communist propaganda.
Printed propaganda has also been sent from Cuba into most other
Latin American States, and Cuban diplomatic missions and personnel
have actively disseminated it. Students returning from indoctrination
in Cuba have helped establish Cuban Institutes for Friendship among
Peoples which have functioned as propaganda outlets.
4. Thousands of Latin Americans have been brought to Cuba; about
1,200 foreign trainees are believed to be there now. Many hundreds
have been trained in revolutionary techniques and guerrilla warfare.
Cuba has been made a main transit point for travel between Latin
America and the Bloc.
5. Financial support has been provided by Cuba to revolutionary
groups in a number of countries, although the cases on which we have
reports involved relatively small sums of money. Arms shipments have
See Annex A.
Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Honduras, and the Dominican Republic.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 7
ل
SECRET
3
also been reported, but the evidence is unclear as to quantities shipped
and the extent of Cuba's role in these transactions. We believe that
there is an extensive agent net in Latin America directed from Havana.
6. Castro has associated himself with revolutionary activist groups
throughout Latin America. In most cases these have been Communist,
but where the regular Communist Party favored a legal or parliamen-
tary line he has not hesitated to support dissident Communist groups,
e.g., in Brazil, and non-Communist revolutionaries, e.g., in Guatemala
and El Salvador. In some cases he has sponsored new revolutionary
organizations, e.g., in Panama, Colombia, and Peru. In Chile he has
endorsed a popular front coalition made up of Communist and moderate
leftists.
Evaluation
7. Instances of financial and material support sent by Cuba to revolu-
tionaries in other countries which have come to our attention are
probably only a part of the total effort. Even so, the effort seems to
have been relatively small and ineffective. Yet along with the political
and psychological stimulus which Castro's influence has provided, Cuban
subversive activities have perceptibly strengthened activist revolutionary
groups. Dangerous situations subject to exploitation by Castro and
the Communists exist in a number of Latin American countries-
notably Venezuela, Brazil, British Guiana, the Dominican Republic, and
Bolivia. These dangers arise from political and social tensions which
existed long before Castro came to power. They might lie dormant
for some time; but with Castro as a potential detonator, they are more
likely to blow up. The detonative compound will exist as long as Cas-
troism survives, whatever may happen to Castro personally.
8. The most dangerous aspect of Castroism has been its broad appeal
as a symbol of revolutionary change and nationalist assertiveness in
Latin America. Propaganda from Cuba has taken advantage of this
fact and has almost certainly been a more important influence in the
Latin American situation than Castro's other subversive activities.
During 1960 and 1961 Castroism became a force to be reckoned with
politically in a number of Latin American countries. Certain govern-
ments felt obliged to move in the direction of neutralist and leftist posi-
tions. This influence waned, however, after Castro identified himself
with the Bloc in late 1961. Nevertheless, the appeal to Castro's move-
ment continued to be a source of major concern to almost all govern-
ments and seriously restricted their willingness to associate themselves,
at least publicly, with the US.
4
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 8
II. CASTRO'S SUBVERSIVE POTENTIAL IN THE AFTERMATH OF AN
AGREEMENT UNDER WHICH THE SOVIETS WOULD WITHDRAW
THEIR STRATEGIC MISSILES AND THE US GIVE ASSURANCES THAT
IT WOULD NOT INVADE CUBA
9. Castro's subversive capabilities and his disposition to use them-
will be enhanced by the sense of security provided by such sophisticated
weapons as are retained in Cuba after the withdrawal of Soviet strategic
missiles. The IL-28 bombers, if retained, and other modern equipment
noted in Annex B, would be important in this regard. A US commit-
ment not to invade Cuba will further strengthen his sense of immunity
from reprisal and almost certainly encourage him to intensify subver-
sive activities in other Latin American countries.
Response of Castro Supporters to Missile Base Crisis
10. Castro's supporters throughout Latin America, with few though
important exceptions (e.g., sabotage of oil facilities in Venezuela), failed
to respond to the missile base crisis with effective acts of sabotage or
with impressive public demonstrations. Two important limiting factors
should be taken into account in judging this response, however. US
action to alert Latin American governments led them to make extensive
advance preparation, including deployment of security forces and the
roundup of suspects, a condition of readiness which is unlikely to be
maintained indefinitely. There also may have been some uncertainty
among the activist followers of Castro whether they should make their
big effort in response to the announcement of the US blockade, or wait
for the anticipated US invasion. Moscow's apparent failure to provide
guidance may have contributed to the confusion. It is our judgment,
however, that the response to Castro's appeal for attacks on the US
and its friends indicates that his power to command revolutionary
action, at least in the circumstances of the missile base crisis, is limited.
Support Which Castro Can Expect in the Future
11. The range of Castro's support has been, we believe, considerably
narrowed by events since Castro declared himself a Communist. Rev-
elation of the fact that he had allowed the Soviets to establish offensive
bases under exclusive Soviet control has alienated many non-Communist
nationalists, genuine neutralists, and even revolutionaries seeking social
and economic betterment. San Tiago Dantas, formerly Foreign Min-
ister under President Goulart and an author of Brazil's nonalignment
policy, and leading Mexican officials have publicly expressed their
disenchantment.
12. The activist revolutionaries are probably the only important force
on which Castro can now count, but even their support has apparently
been rendered less effective by differences on the question of Soviet rela-
tions with Castro and with Latin American Communist parties.
SECRET
5
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 9
In addition to Soviet Bloc materiel there are stores of arms inherited
from the Batista regime not being used by Castro forces and available
for distribution outside Cuba. In the past he has apparently been ham-
pered in his efforts to use arms for subversive purposes by problems
of transport and delivery. He has at his disposal, however, 11 IL-14
transports belonging to Cubana airlines which could be used to deliver
arms under certain circumstances. The IL-28's now in Cuba are in-
appropriate for subversive purposes. However, they could be used for
air drops. Cuba has many small craft suitable for infiltration of men
and arms.
The 6 Khronshtadt subchasers, 16 P-6 motor torpedo boats,
and 12 Komar missile boats obtained from the Bloc could also be used
for arms deliveries. If the projected trawler base is built up, trawlers-
both Cuban and Soviet could be used for arms deliveries. If Soviet
submarines call at the trawler base or at other Cuban ports, they, too,
could be used in support of subversive activities. We see no evidence
that Cuba has or is developing a sophisticated amphibious warfare
capability, and all the means of delivery of arms by sea noted above
would be vulnerable to precautionary measures by Latin American mil-
itary and naval forces.
14. Propaganda apparatus. Castro's propaganda machine remains
intact. For the time being, however, his diplomatic missions are likely
to find it harder to disseminate propaganda than in the past, both be-
cause of new precautions by local governments and because of a reduc-
tion in the numbers of cooperative volunteers outside the organized
Communist groups.
15. Money and equipment. Despite differences between Castro and
the USSR concerning dismantling of the missile bases, we believe that the
Soviets will continue to supply Castro with money, supplies, and equip-
ment for subversive activity. The Soviets have certainly supplied Castro
with sophisticated instruments of intelligence collection, sabotage, and
clandestine communications.
16. Organization. The organization of Castro's subversive assets
throughout Latin America was shown by the recent crisis to be loose
and otherwise faulty. We estimate that Castro will make a strong
effort to strengthen and improve it, and that he will continue to receive
support in this effort from the Soviet apparatus, both in Cuba itself,
where the Soviet Ambassador is a veteran officer of the KGB, and in
other important centers of Soviet activity such as Mexico City and
Montevideo.
6
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 10
SECRET
17. If the US and USSR reach and implement the agreement stated
in the problem Castro will gain an immunity which he lacked before the
missile base crisis. He will, furthermore, still have most of the arms
and equipment which were delivered in the post-July buildup, as well
as enhanced capabilities provided by accelerated training. Presumably
his enemies will have about the same, or less, freedom to engage in
propaganda, sabotage, support for resistance activities, and other actions
designed to overthrow Castro than they had before the crisis-almost
certainly not more. Unless Castro is gravely endangered by internal
political and economic problems, there is no reason to believe that anti-
Castro activities are any more likely to jeopardize his position than they
did before the crisis.
18. Situation in Cuba. Castro's ability to engage in subversive activ-
ities will be influenced significantly by the strength and stability of his
position at home. Heightened political and economic difficulties in
Cuba would restrict Castro's subversive effort, while the more secure
he is at home, the more freedom and strength he is likely to have for
subverting other governments and re-establishing his prestige and in-
fluence. Castro's position in Cuba will depend in part on his own
policies, but is likely to depend even more upon those of the Soviets.
19. Alternative Soviet policies. There are several courses of action
with respect to Cuba which the Soviets are likely to consider. Some
leaders may argue that the whole policy of economic and military
support for Castro should be abandoned along with the plan for the
deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba. We believe, however, that
the Soviet stake in Cuba as an ally and as a Soviet center in Latin
America is still too high to abandon. The stake in Castro as a person,
however, is questionable. If the Soviets did make a decision to with-
draw support either from Castro or from Cuba, we believe that Cuban
capability for subversion in Latin America would be greatly reduced, at
least for a time. This capability would be reduced more in the case of
the Soviets' withdrawing support from Cuba than in the case of their
abandonment of Castro alone.
20. An alternative course would be for the Soviets to continue to
extend economic and military assistance. Such assistance could range
all the way from the amounts necessary to maintain Cuba in its present
condition, including support of the expanded military establishment,
to substantial increases. Such a policy would probably reduce con-
siderably Castro's internal problems and thus give him additional free-
dom to engage in external subversion and sabotage. Additions to Cas-
tro's stocks of small arms would not in themselves change his capa-
bility for subversive activity, as he already has supplies of surplus arms.
However, if the Soviets were to provide substantial additional air and
SECRET
7
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 11
sealift capability, the Cubans would be able to mount large-scale
subversive interventions in neighboring countries. Furthermore, what-
ever degree of success is achieved in improving Cuba's position and in
expanding its physical resources, Cuba's net capability for subversion
and sabotage will in the last analysis largely be determined by the..
overall situation in Latin America.
21. We do not believe that Castro or the Soviets can yet foresee what
the effects of the recent crisis will be over the long term on their rela-
tionship. The crisis has probably created difficulties of a political and
psychological nature that neither of them can readily solve, however
determined they may be to do so. Castro may have been moved by the
treatment he has received at the hands of the Soviets to consider
modifying his relationship with them and seeking to improve his rela-
tions with the OAS and possibly even the US. We believe, however,
that he is unlikely to find feasible ways of reducing his dependence
upon the USSR. The Soviets certainly must consider that they have
effective means of exercising control over Castro. Furthermore, his re-
peated assertions of continued loyalty to Marxism-Leninism make it
unlikely that he is seriously contemplating a restoration of relations
with the OAS, or that he could succeed if he tried.
22. Policy of other American nations. Castro's subversive capabilities
will be greatly influenced by the policies and actions of other Latin
American nations, as by those of the US. We believe that the high
state of security alert that has prevailed since 22 October and the show
of unity that marked the recent crisis are unlikely to last. There is
sure to be a revival of nationalist sentiments. On balance, however,
we believe that the prospects for countersubversive action by Latin
American States, on their own and in conjunction with the US, are im-
proved. Many responsible Latin Americans will have interpreted recent
events to mean that firm and united action can be effective against
the Soviet threat from Cuba. However, Latin American governments
will probably be less willing to take coordinated action against Com-
munist inroads if the US commits itself not to invade Cuba.
Likely Future Targets for Cuban Sabotage
23. The extent of Castro's capabilities for sabotage and other clan-
destine activity in Latin America will depend upon the complicated
factors noted above. Whatever his capabilities are, he will not be at
a loss for targets against which to use them. Some of the more obvious
targets are:
a. US missions and personnel. US missions and personnel all over
Latin America were designated as targets for attack in the various
calls for action which went out during the recent crisis. Action against
8
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 12
such targets has a primarily political and propaganda value to Castro
in that it tends to show public opposition to US policy. It is also rela-
tively easy for Castro to promote attacks against official US installations
in a crisis situation and to get help from all the various elements which
are opposed to American influence in the area. Future attacks may
be anticipated in situations in which Castro feels that the public resent-
ment of US policy exists or can be stirred up.
b. Physical targets vulnerable to a limited sabotage effort. Prime
targets for sabotage will be mining, industrial, and business installa-
tions in which there is a large proportion of US capital, which are other-
wise associated with the US, or which are so important to the local
economy that damage to them would create difficulties for govern-
ments which are anti-Castro and cooperating with the US. Oil facilities
in Venezuela, including the oil and water pipelines to the refineries on
the Paraguana Peninsula, and similar facilities are likely to be chosen
as targets for Cuban sabotage. Installations for the handling of Vene-
zuelan iron ore are also likely objectives. US installations in Panama
might be attacked.
c. Port and communications facilities are generally vulnerable to
sabotage and are appealing targets to Cubans and other Latin American
Communists particularly in countries which are cooperating with the
US and whose communications media are taking an anti-Castro line.
Telephone, telegraph, radio and television facilities, and most public
utilities, particularly electric power and transformer stations, are poten-
tial targets. Selection of targets for sabotage will depend on the im-
portance of particular facilities but even more on the varying access of
Castroites and Communists to them.
d. Political targets susceptible to exploitation. Political instability
throughout Latin America, in almost every case characterized by pres-
sures from below upon relatively conservative and generally anti-
Communist governments, provide Castro with opportunities for sub-
versive political activity. Particularly unstable situations include the
following:
(1) Venezuela, where Communist-inspired disorders have been kept
in check by the government, but where continued Communist
and leftist violence may lead the military to take control.
In a country such as Venezuela, where the stability of an anti-
Castro and anti-Communist government depends heavily upon
one man, assassination is another danger.
(2) Nicaragua, where Communist-led groups, in anticipation of
coming elections, may seek to incite or exploit violence against
the Somoza regime.
(3) Guatemala, where President Ydigoras' position is weak and
uncertain.
ΝΗ 50955 DocId:32423995
Page 13
SECRET
9
(4) The Dominican Republic, where the problems of political recon-
struction after a generation of dictatorship have proved almost
more than the caretaker government can handle, and where
some political groupings amenable to Castro's influence are
seeking to gain a footing.
(5) Bolivia, where the struggle for dominance within the ruling
MNR Party between the moderates and those on the far left
is ready-made for exploitation by Castro.
(6) Brazil, where Communists have penetrated the government
and military to some limited extent, the tide of nationalist and
anti-US feeling is strong, and depressed socio-economic condi-
tions and inefficient government administration provide Castro
many opportunities, especially in the northeast.
C
10
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 14
140
PROPAGANDA
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 15
PROPAGANDA
General: Sinca 1 Jamary 1959, the Castro/Communist Regine has
placed great emphasis on ito propaganda efforts throughout Latin America,
as reflected in the quantities of persomel and obvious amounts of
funds devoted to this enterprise. One of the first efforts ves to
establish PRETEA LATINA, a Cuban news agency with exchange agreements
with TASS and the HEM CHINA NEWS AGENCY, as the principal Castro/Communist
overt cutlet. Shipments of printed pamphlets, books, magazines and
leaflets have been discovered in Cuban diplomatic pouches in Mexico,
Panama, Chile and Argentins. The baggage of most travellers departing
Cuba contains printed propagenda. Cuban government personalities such
as Dr. Armando Hert, Minister of Education, are known to have transported.
quantities of this printed material. Personal representation plays a
great part in the Castro/Communist propaganda program. Trevellers to
Cuba for economic, political and cultural meetings are indoctrinated and
are provided material for further distribution upon return to their home
countries. Student, labor, youth, wonen, and professional organizations
serve as a medium for propaganda dissemination. Diplomatic and economic
representatives have cultivated local commmists, influential leftists,
and anti-government dissidents through personal contact. Radio plays
an extremely important part in the Castro/Comunist propaganda effort
within Cuba and externally.
TAB 1 - PRENSA LATTHA and Printed Material
This tab conteins a detailed summary of Cuban efforts to organize
propaganda and press control and an item illustrating Cuban efforts to
mail printed material through Mexico.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 16
TAB 2 - HAVANA'S International Broadcasting
This tab contains a recent summary of Havana's broadcasting program
with oxamples of Cuban propaganda inciting revolt in Latin America,
Additionally this tab contains four separata items indicating in greater
detail the types of broadcast information currently being disseminated.
TAB 3 - PERSONAL CONTACT
This tab contains 4 items as follows: (1) An example of attempted
diplomatic influence in Bolivia; (2) A tabulation of representatives
attending a recent Congress in Cuba (by profession, country, and organi-
zations reprenanted); (3) An Iten en propaganda through the Cuban
sponsored labor organisation (CTCR); and (4) An example of propaganda
through a cultural organization with inferred connections to an inter-
national organization strongly influenced by Communists,
TAB4U. 6. COUNTER EFFORIS
This teb contains a recent sunmory of USIA programs on Cuba and
a more detailed item on USIA radio broadcasting to Latin America.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 17
2
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 18
SECRET NO FOREIGN DISSEM
The following description of the Cuban Government's measures this
past year to organize propaganda and press control is based upon the
25 September report of an official German service supplemented by August
1962 information from a fairly reliable independent source.
In early 1962 the ORI decided to establish a Comite de Orientacion
Revolucionaria (COR) to be responsible for all propaganda activities
of the Cuban Government and for censorship of the press. Cesar Escalante,
en old-time Comunist, a member of the ONI National Directorate and brother
of Anibal Escalante who was later "purged" by Castro, was appointed head
of the COR and thus given control over the entire Cuban press, radio, and
television. By August, Ceser Escalante was reported to have a personal
staff of 15 workers, most of whom were Communist Party members, and to
be holding weekly briefing sessions with editors of the four Large Havana
newspapers, entrusting censorship to these editors.
In late June 1962, the ORI set up a committee to be in charge of
coordination of Cuban propaganda throughout Latin America. This committee
was subordinate to the COR, and consisted of representatives from the
Ministry of Foreign Relations, the Prensa Latina news agency and the COR.
The director of Prensa Lating was the news agency's representative on this
committee. The representative of the COR, however, along with the repre-
sentative of the Foreign Ministry, believed to be Ramon Penate y Molina,
were said to have actually determined the policy of Prensa Latina.
The reorganization of Prensa Latina is described as Escalante's
most important accomplishment. Since mid-July 1962 the news agency
has been increasingly employed as an instrument of the Cuban Foreign
Ministry and is serving as its propaganda medium in these countries with
SECRET NO FOREIGN DISSEM
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 19
which Cuba no longer maintains diplomatic relations. Cesar Escalante
now controls Prensa Latina's activities both in Cuba and abroad.
He is assisted by Ramon Calcines Gordillo, also a veteran Communist and
member of the ORI National Directorate, who ecte as liaison official
with the Communist parties of Latin America. Calcines has been reported
as being also a director of the Cuban Institute of Friendship with Peoples
(ICAP) with which Prensa Latina maintains close relations.
The staff of the Prensa Latina center in Havana is to be enlarged
from 150 employees to elmost 1,000 by January 1963. The center also
employs about 250 salaried personnel in Latin America in addition to
numerous free-lance correspondents. The Latin American section of the
Prensa Latina center enjoys a favored position with special privileges
given to "sub-agencies" working in countries which have broken diplomatic
relations with Cuba. The sub-agencies in several Latin American capitals
are to be enlarged as operational centers for certain areas for example,
Bogota will be a coordinating center for Colombia, Venezuela, Panama,
Costa Rica, and Nicaragua, and Mexico City for Mexico, Honduras, El
Salvador, and Guatemala.
The 100-Kilowatt VHF transmitter of Radio Havana is of special
Importance for increasing Cuban propaganda activities in Latin America:
et the end of propaganda broadcasts the station reportedly also transmits
specific directives to Cuban agents abroad. The manager of the radio
station is Baldomoro Alvarez Rios, president of the Cuban-Chinese Friend-
ship Committee, who maintains close contact with Shen Chien, Communist
Chinese embassador to Cube. Communist China is said to have considerable
influence on Cuba propaganda activities.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 20
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
2
A biweekly periodical, Panorama Economico Latinoamericano, which is
distributed throughout Latin America, is to be given wider circulation
and published additionally in an English-language edition. Fernando
Colino, editor of the periodical, is said to be plamming a campaign
on "the economic tragedy of the Latin American peoples." (CIA CS-3/530,
108, 5 December, SECRET NO FOREION DISSIM)
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 21
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSEM
3
INFORMATION REPORT
-2/8/13-
INFORMATION PEPORT
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States within the meaning of the Espionage Laws, Title
18, U.S.C.. Secs. 793 and 794, the transmission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited by law.
SECRET
NO FOREIGN DISSIM
:
COUNTRY
Mexico/Cuba
REPORT NO.
CS-3/536,706
SUBJECT
Return of Cuban Propaganda
To the Cuban Embassy by the
Mexican Post Office
DATE DISTR.
8 February 1963
NO. PAGES
1
:
REFERENCES
RD
DATE OF
INFO.
21 January 1963
PLACE &
DATE ACQ.
Mexico, Mexico City (21 January 1963) FIELD REPORT NO.
HMM-6958
SOURCE EVALUATIONS ARE DEFINITIVE. APPRAISAL OF CONTENT IS TENTATIVE.
SOURCE:
Person (F) with good contacts in the Cuban Embassy in
Mexico City. Appraisal of Content: 3.
C
Recently Mexican postal authorities returned a large amount
of Cuban propaganda to the Cuban Embassy with the stamp "no
such address." Herberto Jorrin Munoz, an employee of the Cuban
Embassy, commented that with such tactics the Mexican Post
Office "is sabotaging the Cuban Revolution."
Field Comment. TDCS-3/526,575 reported that on 26 October 1962
Mexican Authorities had refused to accept a considerable volume
of airmail from Cuba which was destined for countries
other than Mexico and ordered the mail returned to Cuba.
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 22
i
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 23
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
FOREIGN BROADCAST INFORMATION DIVISION
OFFICE OF OPERATIONS
SPECIAL MEMORANDUM
HAVANA'S INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING
31 JANUARY 1963
I. HOURS ON THE AIR
II. SAMPLES OF RADIO PROPAGANDA
INCITING TO REVOLT IN LATIN
AMERICA
NW 50955 DocId: 32423995 Page 24
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Proporod for:
Information Copy form
OFFICIAL USE ONLY
00/F3ID
31 January 1963.
HAVANA'S INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING
I. HOURS ON THE AIP
The Cuban Government uses three vehicles. for its radio propaganda to
audiences in other countries: "Radio Free Dixie," "The Friendly Voice
of Cuba" and "Radio Habana Cuba."
* "Radio Free Dixie" is a one-hour weekly transmission in English to
Negroes in the United States, broadcast over the facilities of Havana's
50-kilowatt transmitter "Radio Progreso" and its network of eight
relay stations situated throughout Cuba. Robert F. Williams, the North
Carolina Negro who fled to Cuba to avoid prosecution for alleged kid-
napping, is the director and chief commentator of this program, which is
heard every Friday night at 10 p.m. EST. Using "Jazz" terminology and
frequently crude language, Williams tells his "oppressed Worth American
brothers" that they are going to have to "fill a lot of jails and a lot
of graves, and not just with black boys, either," in order to achieve
"freedom and social justice." Assisting Williams are newscaster Carlos
Moore and "musical hostess" (disc jockey and commentator) Jo Salas.
"Radio Free Dixie" is heard very well in southern Florida .and can probably
be heard in many areas of the southern United States without elaborate
technical facilities.
+ "The Friendly Voice of Cuba," formerly a popular Havana radio station
known as "Radio Mambi," began broadcasting in May 1962. Although this
powerful station does not so announce, its transmissions are apparently
intended for listeners in the United States. "The Friendly Voice of
Cuba" broadcasts from 6