198-10007-10049
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
JFK Assassination System
Identification Form
Date:
6/24/201
Agency Information
AGENCY: ARMY
198-10007-10049
CALIFANO PAPERS
RECORD NUMBER:
RECORD SERIES:
AGENCY FILE NUMBER:
Document Information
ORIGINATOR:
ICCCA
FROM:
TO:
JOSEPH CALIFANO
TITLE:
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CASTRO-COMMUNIST SUBVERSION
DATE:
PAGES:
00/00/0000
84
SUBJECTS:
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF FUNDS
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF PROPAGANDA
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF ARMS
CONTROL OF TRAVEL BY SUBVERSIVES
TRAINING OF LATIN AMERICANS IN THE UNITED STATES
EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
SURVEILLANCE OF THE CARIBBEAN
DOCUMENT TYPE:
CLASSIFICATION:
RESTRICTIONS:
CURRENT STATUS:
DATE OF LAST REVIEW:
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS:
PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
Secret
IB; IC
Redact
02/06/1998
Califano Papers, Box 3, Folder 13. Collection of papers produced by the Subcommittee on
Castro-Communist Subversion.
JFK Review
Department of the Army EO 13528
Declassify Exclude Exempt
Authority,
Review Date 8/19/2015 By Khmer
NO STATE OBJECTION
TO DECLASSIFICATION,
BY OMDATE 01/18/16
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 1
43
SECRET
To Joseph Califano, with thanks
for patient help in a light
measure.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CASTRO-COMMUNIST SUBVERSION
PAPERS ON
CONTROL OF TRAVEL BY SUBVERSIVES
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF FUNDS
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF PROPAGANDA
CONTROL OF THE MOVEMENT OF ARMS
SURVEILLANCE OF THE CARIBBEAN
EXCHANGE OF INTELLIGENCE
TRAINING OF LATIN AMERICANS IN THE UNITED STATES
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 2
GROUP-1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND DECLASSIFICATION
SECRET
SECRET
The papers included herein embody a series
of action programs designed to impede the
Castro-Communist subversive effort in Latin
America. They were developed by an inter-
departmental group which included represen--
tation from the White House, Department of
State, Department of Defense, Department of
Justice, Treasury Department, Central Intel-
ligence Agency and United States Information
Agency.
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 3
SECRET
SECRET
CUBA
THE MOVEMENT OF SUBVERSIVES
AND SUBVERSIVE TRAINEES
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 4
SECRET
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
I.
Introduction
1
II.
Nature and Scope of the Problem
2
Ш.
The Attitudes of the Latin American Nations
6
IV. Actions Concerning Legitimate Travel
8
1. Immediate Impact Actions
9
a. Administrative Actions
9
b. Intelligence Actions
9
c. Actions Related to Common Carriers
10
d. Propaganda Actions
10
2. Longer Range Actions
10
a. Political Actions
11
b. Intelligence Actions
11
c. Administrative Actions
12
d. Actions Related to Common Carriers
12
e. Propaganda Actions
13
3. Organization of American States (OAS) Actions 13
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 5
PAGE
V. Actions Concerning llegal Travel
14
1. Immediate Impact Actions
14
a. Intelligence Actions
14
b. Surveillance and Reporting Actions
15
2. Longer Range Actions
15
a. Surveillance Actions
15
b. U. S. Military Assistance Actions
16
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 6
SECRET
CUBA
THE MOVEMENT OF SUBVERSIVES AND SUBVERSIVE TRAINEES
I. Introduction
The actions proposed herein are designed to impede
the flow of subversives between Cuba and other Latin
American countries. Execution of any one or more of
the enumerated actions will ameliorate the situation;
execution of them all will not completely solve it..
The practical problems involved are too numerous and
complex.
With respect to diminishing legal travel to Cuba,
we face multiple problems in the policies and attitudes
of those Latin American countries through which the
subversive traveller must pass. From the viewpoint of
these nations the direct actions required have strong
political and sometimes legal implications - impli-
cations which cannot be overcome easily, even when
the leaders of these countries choose to do so..
In the matter of clandestine travel, we are
confronted not only with the great depth of communist
guile, born of two generations of experience in the
international movement of subversives, but with the
inexperience, ineptitude and lack of awareness in
these same matters on the part of the Latin American
community.
In spite of this, the advantages do not all reside
with the communists. Cuba's insular character imposes
certain sharp limitations upon personal movement.
Cuba has no frontiers with other states; everyone
who enters the country must do so either by water,
or air. There can be no slipping through the
barbed wire.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 7
SECRET
:
On the other hand, this same geographic situation
makes clandestine entry and exit reasonably simple.
There are 3,825 linear miles of essentially unpa-
trolled Central American coastline, within 175 to
850 miles from Cuba. There are at least 93 airfields,
other than ours, within 700 miles of the island, and
the ships and craft indigenous to the Caribbean, and
capable of supporting the subversive ebb and flow,
number well into the thousands.
Even in the face of these unfavorable factors, a
program of direct restraints, selected from among
the actions enumerated herein, can have favorable
effects. Under the proposed steps some travel would
be stopped completely. More - probably much more
would be rendered difficult. Some hitherto legal
movement would be driven underground. Previous.
clandestine movement would be impeded, complicated
and harassed to the point where it becomes more
costly, more uncertain, more hazardous and thus,
hopefully, less extensive.
II. Nature and Scope of the Problem
We do not know enough about the movement of
subversive trainees, into Cuba and
more important -
out of Cuba. We do not know enough about the volume
of travel, or the media employed. This is par-
ticularly true in the area of illicit traffic, where
our knowledge is extremely limited.
Regarding legal travel to Cuba, CIA presents the
following estimate:
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 8
2
SECRET
Legal Travel Into Cuba
Country No. of Legal Travellers Country No. of Legal Travellers
Jan-Feb
1962
1963
1962
Jan-Feb
1963
Mexico
4912*
969
Argentina
500
Unk
Guatemala 80
Unk
Uruguay
115
Unk
El Salvador 100
8
Paraguay
60
Unk
Nicaragua
50
Unk
Brazil
400
Unk
Costa Rica 216
10
Honduras
92.
21
Venezuela 200
Unk
British
40
Unk
Guiana
Colombia
400
Unk
Panama
56
1.
Ecuador
208
Unk
Trinidad
Unk
Unk
Peru
181
Unk :
Jamaica.
593
Unk
:
Bolivia
500
Unk
Dominican
None
Unk
Republic
Chile
551
85
Haiti
Unk
Unk
* In transit, including about 300 Mexicans
While some of these travellers proceeded to Cuba by
other routes, the great majority passed through Mexico.
On the most conservative basis, then, it will be seen.
that there cannot have been fewer than 4,912 travellers
to Cuba during 1962, while the average monthly number
passing through Mexico for the first two months of
1963 is even higher than the 1962 monthly average.
Of the total number visiting Cuba, the Central
Intelligence Agency estimates that at least 1,500, and
perhaps as many as 2,000, have received ideological
indoctrination or guerrilla warfare training. Many
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 9
3
SECRET
of these are still in Cuba. Others have returned to
their homelands; some by legal means; some probably
by illicit means. There is no reason to presume,
moreover, that the travel to Cuba of the remaining
3,000-3,500 was entirely consistent with the best
interests of the hemisphere.
Prior to the October crisis, Latin Americans
travelling to Cuba usually moved by regular commercial
airlines or, on occasion, by specially chartered
Cubana flights. Some travelled to Trinidad or
Curacao and thence by regularly scheduled Cubana or
KLM flights to Havana. Others travelled to Mexico,
and from there by Mexicana or Cubana commercial
flights to Havana. With the cessation of service
to Cuba by Pan American, KLM, Mexicana, and Iberia
airlines in October, the regular Cubana service
between Mexico City and Havana remained the sole
direct and regular airline connection between Cuba
and the remainder of Latin America.
The Cubana service between Havana and Mexico is
scheduled to operate twice weekly, but sometimes only
a single flight is completed per week. Aircraft now
employed are British Britannias an obsolescent model.
Cubana has requested, but has not yet received,
Mexican approval to substitute Soviet IL-18 transports
for the old Britannias. Delay by the Mexicans in
granting this approval can have the favorable effect
of impeding travel, as the Britannias are now in
poor condition. If, in addition, the British and
Canadians can be induced to suspend delivery of
spare parts, the planes will soon become inoperative.
Iberia airlines resumed its regular twice-monthly
flights from Madrid to Havana on 11 February. This
flight makes one stop, in the Azores, before reaching.
Havana.
KLM has not yet resumed its regular flights to Cuba
from the Netherlands Antilles. However, it is now con-
sidering doing so. In this regard it is concluded that
resumption of scheduled flights by a United States
carrier could serve as an encouragement to KLM and
others to do the same.
SECRET
4
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 10
::
SECRET
Soviet and Czech airlines serving Cuba do not stop
regularly at any other Latin American country, though
the Soviet Aeroflot line has occasionally sought and
received permission from Brazil to land at Recife,
enroute to Cuba. Some Latin Americans may have
travelled to Cuba on these infrequent flights and,
should Brazil permit this arrangement to become
regularized, the movement of subversives could
achieve a new order of magnitude.
A Canadian non-scheduled line has operated a few
flights from Canada to Havana and return, carrying
both material and personnel. The Canadians have been
unresponsive to our efforts to obtain identification
of the passengers.
There are no regularly scheduled sea carriers
operating between Latin America and Cuba. However,
a number of trainees from British Guiana have
travelled to Cuba aboard unscheduled Cuban merchant
vessels engaged in transporting rice from Guiana to
Cuba.
Clandestine sources report that transit of Latin
Americans through Mexico to Cuba often involves illicit
procedures. The Cuban embassy in Mexico City provides
the travellers, whom they identify as tourists, with
special Cuban entry papers; no entry is made in their
passports, and they are given pseudonyms for travel
out of and into Mexico. This procedure is obviously
designed to impede any effort by the other Latin
American governments subsequently to identify the
travellers and to exercise surveillance over their
activities upon their return.
Evidence at hand portrays a substantial flow of
travel by legal means. This must be countered
directly. Beyond this, and perhaps of greater
importance, is the problem of illicit movement both
into and out of Cuba, which will undoubtedly assume
growing proportions as legal travel is curtailed,
and about which our intelligence is at present most
limited. Elimination of this intelligence void must
be accorded high priority.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 11
5
SECRET
III. The Attitudes of the Latin American Nations
Success of many of the overt actions proposed in
the sections to follow will turn upon the attitudes
of the Latin American nations within whose borders
the restraining actions must take place. Presented
briefly below is an estimate of what can be expected
from the various sectors of Latin America in terms
of participation in a coordinated program of travel
control.
As a general matter, the imposition of controls
on travel is not popular with the public in any Latin
American country. This, coupled with their current:
lack of full awareness of the danger represented by
Cuba's training of subversives, will diminish the
willingness of some governments to impose controls
unilaterally. This is especially true since they
recognize that unilateral restraints will have little
effect on curbing the travel of their nationals to
Cuba, if supporting multilateral action is not also
taken. It is likely, however, that most of the
Latin American countries would respond favorably--
albeit in varying degrees -- to US leadership in
seeking to reduce the flow of persons to Cuba for
ideological or subversive training.
The Central American countries are more acutely
aware of the danger posed by Cuban-inspired sub-
version than is Latin America at large, and can be
expected to react favorably to proposals for re-
ducing travel to Cuba which President Kennedy might
present at the San Jose Presidential meeting.
However, their ability to carry out commitments which
they may make will be limited by domestic legal
and political considerations, as well as by their
countries' technical incompetence in such matters.
Since Mexico is currently the principal
hemisphere transit point for legal travel of sub-
versives to and from Cuba, its attitude is of great
importance. Mexico, to date, has taken several
significant steps with respect to travel between
Mexican cities and Cuba. It has instituted close
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 12
6
SECRET
surveillance over travellers, to include stamping.
passports to evidence travel to Cuba. In addition,
the Mexicans now photograph, covertly, all persons
arriving from or departing for Cuba, and have given
tacit approval to suspension of Cuban service by
Compania Mexicana de Aviacion (CMA). These actions
all suggest that Mexico might be induced to take even
further cooperative steps, particularly on an un-
publicized, bi-lateral basis, wherein the political
hazards of taking a public OAS position are not
involved. In this regard, the Central American
Presidents would probably agree individually to seek.
the participation of President Lopez Mateos of Mexico
in specific cooperative moves to restrict the flow
of persons to Cuba through that country.
Peru now has regulations which actually prohibit
travel to Cuba, but the regulations have engendered
public resistance, and are not enforced. The
Dominican Republic prohibits such travel. Haiti
has no established policy, but passports and exit
permits are reportedly issued only on the personal
approval of President Duvalier, Colombia could
legally impose restrictions by executive decree,
but has shown no inclination to do so. Other
countries, such as Venezuela, Chile, and the Central
American nations, plead the existence of legal or
constitutional barriers which preclude the pro-
hibition of travel to Cuba, but thus far, they
have made little effort to remove these barriers.
Five Latin American countries (Brazil, Chile,
Uruguay, Mexico, and Bolivia) now maintain diplomatic
relations with Cuba. Brazil continues its drift to
the left and gives little evidence of modifying its
tolerant attitude toward the Castro government.
Chile, with a legal Communist Party, exercises no
restraints on travel to Cuba, either direct or
via third country.
The elimination of all legitimate passenger
service to Cuba from Latin America could be
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 13
7
SECRET
achieved through invocation of the Rio Treaty, but it
is unlikely that the hemisphere countries would agree
to do so in the absence of some major crisis similar.
to that involving the Soviet missiles or a case of
direct Cuban intervention in another Latin American
country. Nevertheless, a campaign on our part to
develop a full awareness of the danger represented
by the flow of Castro-trained subversives would
probably create a growing willingness to take action
oriented in this direction. In this connection,
however, it is concluded that resumption of regular
passenger service to Cuba by United States companies
would render more difficult our efforts to persuade
Latin American and other free world countries to
take a grave view of the situation, and to partici-
pate in dynamic action.
Virtually, all the Latin American countries would
be willing to move against Cuban-trained subversives
upon their return to home countries, once they put
their new training to use. The efforts of these
nations will not be dramatically effective, however,
since, in the area of internal security, all of them
suffer from deficiencies in technical skill, training,
equipment and sometimes from a lack of a sense of
urgency. The United States can provide essential
leadership in eliminating all of these deficiencies.
IV. Actions Concerning Legitimate Travel
Listed below are specific actions contemplated to
impede legitimately executed travel, to and from Cuba.
Legitimate travel is characterized, for this purpose,
as travel on recognized public carriers, openly
arranged and involving travel documents which are
presumed to be in proper order, Certain of the
actions, it will be noted, are partially in effect.
Others have been proposed to the OAS wholly or in
part by its Special Consultative Committee on
Security.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 14
8
SECRET
1. Immediate Impact Actions
The following actions offer promise of producing
early, visible and effective results.
a. Administrative Actions
(1) Both through the OAS and bilaterally, induce
each Western Hemisphere country to:
(a) Stamp passports or other travel
documents issued to own nationals "not valid
for travel to Cuba."
(b) Refuse exit permits for Cuba to any
national of a third country who cannot produce
a valid permit issued by his own country for
travel to Cuba.
(c) Refuse to honor any visa for Cuba which
is not an integral, non-detachable part of the
travel document issued by the country of which
the traveller is a citizen.
(d) Require accurate manifests of all carriers
departing for or arriving from Cuba, and furnish
copies of these manifests to diplomatic missions
of other Western Hemisphere countries which are
affected.
(2) Persuade Mexico to fingerprint, in addition
to photographing, all persons leaving foror
arriving from Cuba, and to provide data to the par-
ent country of the nationals involved.
(3) Make covert arrangements with police and
other security and administrative officials in
countries now being used for legal transit to Cuba
to impose administrative impediments and harassment
on suspicious Cuba-bound travellers, in order to
increase the difficulty of travel and thus dis-
courage prospective travellers.
b. Intelligence Actions
(1) Intensify U.S. intelligence efforts in
each country to identify persons who have travelled,
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 15
9
SECRET
or intend to travel, to Cuba, and report selected
information promptly to the host government, as
consistent with our own intelligence pro-
gram, and the requirement to protect our sources
(2) Intensify current efforts to introduce
covert, U.S. controlled agents from each country
into the Cuban training program.
c. Actions Related to Common Carriers
(1) Prohibit resumption of air service to
Cuba by U.S. carriers, in order to provide a
favorable example to other nations.
(2) Expand current restrictions on foreign
shipping engaging in commerce with Cuba by
closing United States ports to all ships of
any shipping line which continues to send any
ships to Cuban ports.
(3) Both through the OAS and bilaterally, request
Latin American countries to prohibit ships arriving
from or departing for Cuba from embarking or disem-
barking passengers in their ports.
(4) Both through the OAS and bilaterally,
request Latin American countries to deny their
ports to ships of Cuban registry.
d. Propaganda Actions
Pursue a hemisphere-wide publicity campaign
to expose the scope and purpose of Cuban training
of the nationals of other countries for sub-
versive purposes, in order to discourage pro-
spective trainees and impress the governments
and the peoples concerned with the urgent
need to halt the travel of Latin American
nationals to Cuba.
2. Longer Range Actions
The following actions should also be undertaken
without delay. Their ultimate results may be of far-
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 16
10
SECRET
reaching importance, but probably will be longer in
realization.
a. Political Actions
(1) Renew and intensify bilateral negotiations
with the five Latin American governments which.
have not done so to sever diplomatic relations with
Cuba.
(2) Through bilateral negotiations press countries
with inadequate legal restrictions on travel to
Cuba to adopt laws enabling the prohibition of such
travel and providing severe penalties for evasion.
Recommend that rewards be offered for identification
of evaders,
(3) In separate diplomatic approaches to each
country, reiterate the need for full and effective
cooperation with appropriate OAS bodies, and bi-
laterally among the several states, in the inter-
change of information concerning travel of persons
to Cuba and other Castro-Communist subversive
activities.
(4) Propose periodic regional or sub-regional
meetings of ministers of Government of the
American Republics to review the implementation
of steps taken by them to combat movement of
subversives in the Caribbean.
(5) Urge other Latin American nations to
negotiate separately and/or collectively with Mexico
Uruguay, Brazil, Bolivia and Chile in order to en-
list cooperation in adopting specific measures to
prevent the movement through their countries of
third country personnel to and from Cuba.
b. Intelligence Actions
Intensify our action in making available to each
country selected intelligence concerning the extent,
nature, and insidious implications, of Cuban sub-
versive activities, as consistent with the require-
ment to protect our own intelligence program.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 17
11
SECRET
reaching importance, but probably will be longer in
realization.
a. Political Actions
(1) Renew and intensify bilateral negotiations
with the five Latin American governments which
have not done so to sever diplomatic relations with
Cuba.
(2) Through bilateral negotiations press countries
with inadequate legal restrictions on travel to
Cuba to adopt laws enabling the prohibition of such
travel and providing severe penalties for evasion.
Recommend that rewards be offered for identification
of evaders.
(3) In separate diplomatic approaches to each
country, reiterate the need for full and effective
cooperation with appropriate OAS bodies, and bi-
laterally among the several states, in the inter-
change of information concerning travel of persons
to Cuba and other Castro-Communist subversive
activities.
(4) Propose periodic regional or sub-regional
meetings of ministers of Government of the
American Republics to review the implementation
of steps taken by them to combat movement of
subversives in the Caribbean.
(5) Urge other Latin American nations to
negotiate separately and/or collectively with Mexico
Uruguay, Brazil, Bolivia and Chile in order to en-
list cooperation in adopting specific measures to
prevent the movement through their countries of
third country personnel to and from Cuba.
b. Intelligence Actions
Intensify our action in making available to each
country selected intelligence concerning the extent,
nature, and insidious implications, of Cuban sub-
versive activities, as consistent with the require-
ment to protect our own intelligence program.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 18
11
SECRET
c. Administrative Actions
(1) Encourage Latin American governments to insti-
tute administrative procedures, such as exhaustive
examination of manifests, air-worthiness checks of
aircraft, baggage inspection and inspection of health
and other documents, all designed deliberately to
delay and otherwise make difficult the carrying of
passengers to Cuba.
(2) Request governments of Latin American countries
which persist in maintaining diplomatic relations
with Cuba to expose the falsification of travel docu-
ments by Cuban embassies or consulates, and take
punitive measures, such as the expulsion of Cuban
diplomatic personnel, to bring such ille illegal activity
to a halt. Provide U.S. technical assistance as re-
quested.
(3) Intensify technical assistance to Latin
American countries in improving immigration and
customs controls.
d. Actions Related to Common Carriers:
(1) Persuade Mexico to halt Cubana Airlines
service. If unable to do so, seek to persuade
Mexico to refuse the introduction of Soviet-made air-
craft in the Havana-Mexico City route on technical
grounds. This will create an obstacle to Cubana,
since the Britannia aircraft now used are falling
into disrepair.
(2) Request again of Great Britain, Canada, and
any other potential supplier that they cut off the
supply of spare parts for Cuba's Britannia aircraft.
(3) Conduct negotiations with the Netherlands,
Mexico, Cañada and Spain to persuade those countries
to stop, or refrain from reestablishing, commercial
air flights to Cuba. Enlist the cooperation of
other Western Hemisphere countries normally pro-
viding terminal service for any of the airlines in-
volved, such as Venezuela and Trinidad, in applying
pressure.
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 19
12
SECRET
e. Propaganda Actions
(1) Intensify USIA and CIA input of propaganda
in Latin American public information media discredit-
ing the Cuban training effort, exposing the hazard
which it holds for Latin American tranquility, and
discrediting persons who have undergone subversive
training, in order to discourage possible volunteers
and develop popular opposition to such activities.
(2) Identify returned trainees who are dis-
satisfied with their Cuban training experience and
exploit their capabilities for provision of intelli-
gence and propaganda material for exposing and
discrediting Castro-Communist subversive activities
(3) Initiate a publicity campaign throughout.
Latin America, not attributable to the United States,
which focuses unfavorably on the use of Mexican,
Uruguayan, Brazilian, and Chilean transit facilities
for movement of persons of other countries to and
from Cuba for subversive purposes.
3. Organization of American States (OAS) Actions
In view of the important political, psychological,
and, hopefully, material benefits to be derived from
any success achieved through the OAS in combatting
Cuban subversive activity, the following measures
should be undertaken by the United States in that body,
at times and under circumstances which give regard to
the need to preserve hemispheric solidarity, and give
recognition to the fact that progress will probably
be slow.
a. Pursue adoption by the OAS of a resolution
calling upon all member states to sever diplomatic
relations with Cuba, thus impeding the travel of
subversives to Cuba by legal means, and at the same
time, creating serious obstacles to other related
Cuban subversive activities.
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 20
13
SECRET
b. Propose recommendations by the OAS to member
governments of a program of steps, on both the
national and international levels, to control
travel by their nationals to Cuba, utilizing the
proposals in the report by the Special Consultative
Committee on Security (SCCS) as well as the specific
recommendations set forth herein.
c. Once the initial comprehensive program in
b. above is undertaken, utilize the appropriate
OAS bodies to follow up on implementation through
such means as multilateral exchange of information,
meeting of experts, and utilization by individual
countries of the services of the Special Consulta-
tive Committee on Security.
d. Propose adoption by the OAS of a resolution,
binding upon all member states, to terminate
regular air and maritime carrier traffic with
Cuba.
V. Actions Concerning Illegal Travel
As the actions outlined in the preceding sections
become effective, one of the results will be to force
the hitherto legal travel into clandestine channels.
It may, therefore, be expected that measures to
impede illegal movement will acquire steadily in-
creasing importance.
The steps proposed herein are listed, as in the
preceding section, in terms of immediate impact pro-
jects which promise early and visible results, and
longer range projects which, while of great importance,
cannot be expected to mature as rapidly.
1. Immediate Impact Actions
a. Intelligence Actions
(1) Increase greatly our penetration and
other intelligence efforts to identify persons
engaging in illegal travel to Cuba, and
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 21
14
SECRET
determine routes and methods employed. Report
selected information, consistent with the
requirement for protecting our own intelligence
program, to host government.
(2) Utilize US intelligence capabilities to
determine the nature and extent of clandestine
aircraft and small boat traffic between Cuba and
other countries in the Caribbean area, with
special attention to Mexico, Honduras, Jamaica,
Haiti and the Dominican Republic. Use evidence
obtained to persuade governments concerned to
institute surveillance and other control measures.
b. Surveillance and Reporting Actions
(1) Continue current US sea and air sur-
veillance of the Caribbean area contiguous to
Cuba.
(2) Continue the development, at high
priority, of US communications in Latin America,
in order to improve alerting, reporting and
control capabilities.
(3) Establish intelligence centers at
Caribbean Command and Caribbean Sea Frontier
Headquarters for rapid processing and dissemi-
nation to countries concerned via the American
Ambassadors, of intelligence on the movement
of subversives.
2. Longer Range Actions
a. Surveillance Actions
(1) Establish a coordinated Caribbean sur-
veillance system involving:
(a) Continued close-in surveillance of
Cuba by US forces.
(b) A US military alerting system, by
which intelligence of subversive movement will
be rapidly transmitted to the American
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 22
15
SECRET
Ambassadors to countries concerned through
intelligence centers at Caribbean Command
and Caribbean Sea Frontier Headquarters of
the Atlantic Command,
(c) A unilateral surveillance and inter-
ception effort by each country in its own
territorial waters.
(d) US assistance in final interception
in territorial waters, upon request by the
country concerned.
b. US Military Assistance Actions
(1) Establish Military Assistance objectives
and planning guidance to provide selected
countries, especially in the Caribbean and
Central American area, with the necessary small
patrol craft, training and logistical support,
including fuel for operations if required, to
enable these countries to establish an effective
patrol of their own coasts. Provide necessary.
funds in addition to present programs.
(2) Provide US Navy, Air Force and Coast
Guard training assistance, as required, to
develop or improve coastal patrol capabilities
of Latin American military forces. This may
take the form of a Canal Zone training activity,
employment of mobile training teams, or a com-
bination of both.
(3) Urge the accelerated improvement of
internal security forces and police forces in
Latin American countries and the intensification
of patrol and intelligence activities aimed at
preventing clandestine departures and apprehending
returned trainees. Provide equipment, training
and advice as required.
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 23
16:
SECRET
SECRET
CUBA
CONTROLS ON THE MOVEMENT OF FUNDS
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 24
SECRET
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
I. Introduction
1
II. Nature and Scope of the Problem
2
1. General Methods of Transferring Convertible
Currency
2
2. Introduction by Individual Travellers
3
3. Transfers through Banking Institutions
4
4. Transfers by Diplomatic Personnel
5
5. Transfers through Trade Subterfuge
5
6. Relative Importance of Transfer Methods
6
Ш.
Actions Recommended
6
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId: 32424042 Page 25
SECRET
I.
CUBA
DIRECT CONTROLS ON THE MOVEMENT OF FUNDS TO AND
WITHIN LATIN AMERICA
Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to recommend measures
which will impose direct controls upon the flow of funds
from Cuba to and within other Latin American countries.
We possess evidence that Cuba is providing financial
support to subversive campaigns in other Latin American
countries, but the full dimensions of the problem, in
terms of amounts involved and methods used, are not
known. We need more information. The difficulty with
which this information is procured underscores the prob-
lems of counter-measures, since funds can be transferred
Internationally or acquired locally in many ways, all
difficult to detect and harder to prevent. While we
may be able to diminish the flow through some channels
and increase the difficulty of Castro's subversive
financial operations in others, we cannot hope to suc-
ceed in stopping them altogether, and even if this were
feasible, the possibility of financial support of
subversion by the USSR and other Bloc nations would remain.
Nevertheless, it should not be concluded that
the impediments recommended herein are of insufficient
importance to warrant their imposition. Impediments
to the movement of funds can be imposed at relatively
little cost to the United States, and they will have
some effect in interfering with Castro's pursuit, through
subversion, of his basic objective of gaining communist
allies in Latin America. This effect could be very
significant when added to others that we hope to achieve
through our over-all anti-subversion program.
In examining this problem, it quickly became
evident that the most effective countermeasures are to
SECRET
NW 50955 DocId:32424042 Page 26
SECRET
be found in the area of reducing the capability of
Cuba to acquire reserves of free world convertible
currencies, such as U.S. dollars, Canadian dollars,
Pounds Sterling, Swiss francs, etc. Cuban pesos are
usable only in Cuba. They are not convertible to any
other currency and are therefore of little if any value
elsewhere in the world. Cuba's reserves of foreign
exchange, moreover, have been steadily diminishing
and are now estimated to stand at not more than $25
million to $50 million. If we are willing to intensify
our efforts to weaken the Cuban economy, these foreign
exchange reserves can be reduced further. However, it
must notobe overlooked that the Soviet Union can provide
foreign exchange for Cuban use.
:
While of transcendent importance, this question
of diminishing Cuba's foreign exchange through economic
measures is properly related to the larger objective of
weakening the economic position of Castro-Communist
Cuba, and thus advancing further toward the goal of
causing the downfall of the Communist government. As
progress is realized in this broad endeavor, there will
be a reduction in Castro's ability to finance subver-
sive operations in the Hemisphere.
The matter of intensifying our economic warfare
against Cuba is regarded, however, as beyond the
purview of this committee. Therefore, the program of
actions recommended in this paper has been directed
to the transfer of funds. This includes physical
transfers, transfers through bank transactions and
transfers by subterfuge in connection with trade.
II.
Nature and Scope of the Problem
1. The Castro regime may transfer convertible
currency to subversives in other Latin American
countries by four general methods:
a. Introduction by hand, by legal or illegal
travellers.
b