202-10001-10172
2023 RELEASE UNDER THE PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY ASSASSINATION RECORDS ACT OF 1992
Date : 08/04/98
Page : 1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : JCS
RECORD NUMBER : 202-10001-10172
RECORDS SERIES : FOIA SERIES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : DOC 173
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : OSD
FROM :
TO :
TITLE : THE CUBA PROJECT
DATE : 01/18/62
PAGES : 24
SUBJECTS: OPERATION MONGOOSE
DOCUMENT TYPE : MEMORANDUM
CLASSIFICATION: TOP SECRET
RESTRICTIONS : 1B, 1C
CURRENT STATUS : RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 07/30/98
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS : Bracketed portions withheld by Joint Staff. Reviewed
by CIA, State, OSD.
NO JOINT STAFF OBJECTION
TO DECLASSIFICATION
REQUIRES CONCURRENCE OF
CIA
DATE: MAR -2016
NW 50955 DocId: 32424903 Page 1
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
Date : 08/04/98
Page : 1
JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: JCS
RECORD NUMBER : 202-10001-10172
RECORDS SERIES : FOIA SERIES
AGENCY FILE NUMBER: DOC 173
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : OSD
FROM :
TO
:
TITLE
:
THE CUBA PROJECT
DATE :
01/18/62
PAGES : 24
SUBJECTS: OPERATION MONGOOSE
DOCUMENT TYPE
CLASSIFICATION
RESTRICTIONS
CURRENT STATUS
: MEMORANDUM
: TOP SECRET
: 1B, 1C
:
RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 07/30/98
OPENING CRITERIA :
COMMENTS
:
Bracketed portions withheld by Joint Staff.
by CIA, State, OSD.
NW 50955 DocId:32424903 Page 2
[R]
ITEM IS RESTRICTED
Reviewed
Program Review by
Brig. Gen. E. G. Lansdale,
Chief of Operations
SENSITIVE
18 January 1962
THE CUBA PROJECT
The Department of State has no objection to the
release or declassification of this document in full
under the provisions of the JFK Assassination Records
Collection Act of 1992 (PL102-526)
Reviewed on 7/30/98/pr
CIA HAS NO OBJECTION TO
DECLASSIFICATION AND/OR
RELEASE OF THIS DOCUMENT
23 JUNE
1. OBJECTIVE
The U.S. objective is to help the Cubans overthrow the Communist
regirne from within Cuba and institute a new government with which the
United States can live in peace.
II. CONCEPT OF OPERATION
Basically, the operation is to bring about the revolt of the Cuban
people. The revolt will overthrow the Communist regime and institute
a new government with which the United States can live in peace.
The revolt requires a strongly motivated political action movement
established within Cuba, to generate the revolt, to give it direction to-
wards the objective, and to capitalize on the climactic moment. The
political actions will be assisted by economic warfare to induce failure
of the Communist regime to supply Cuba's economic needs, psychological
operations to turn the peoples' resentment increasingly against the regime,
and military-type groups to give the popular movement an action arm for
sabotage and armed resistance in support of political objectives.
The failure of the U.S.-sponsored operation in April 1961 so shook
the faith of Cuban patriots in U.S. competence and intentions in support-
ing a revolt against Castro that a new effort to generate a revolt against
the regime in Cuba must have active support from key Latin American
countries. Further, the foreigness (Soviet Union and Bloc) of the tyranny
imposed on the Cuban people must be made clear to the people of the
Western Hemisphere to the point of their deep anger and open actions to
defend the Western Hemisphere against such foreign invasion. Such an
anger will be generated, in part, by appeals from the popular movement
within Cuba to other Latin Americans especially.
The preparation phase must result in a political action organization
in being in key localities inside Cuba, with its own means for internal
communications, its own voice for psychological operations, and its own
action arm (small guerrilla bands, sabotage squads, etc.). It must have
the sympathetic support of the majority of the Cuban people, and make this
fact known to the outside world. (It is reported that the majority of Cubans
are not for the present regime, but are growing apathetic towards what
appears to be a hopeless future or the futility of their status.)
The climactic moment of revolt will come from an angry reaction of
the people to a government action (sparked by an incident), or from a
fracturing of the leadership cadre within the regime, or both. (A major
goal of the Project must be to bring this about.) The popular movement
98 mkh
OSD. NO OBJECTIO
25 JUN98
Excluded from automatic
regrading: DOD Dir.
NW 50955 DocId:32424903 Page 3
-1..
DISA(DFOISR) 37 TS 10.4
87-10R-151) R1
This document contains 9 pages.
Copy No. of
14
copies.
Doc#173 app
SENSITIVE
will capitalize on this climactic moment by initiating an open revolt.
Areas will be taken and held. If necessary, the popular movement will
appeal for help to the free nations of the Western Hemisphere. The---
United States, if possible in concert with other Western Hemisphere
nations, will then give open support to the Cuban peoples' revolt. Such
support will include military force, as necessary.
II. ESTIMATE OF THE SITUATION
Our planning requires sound intelligence estimates of the situation
re Cuba. The latest National Estimate (SNIE 85-61) of 28 November
1961 contains operational conclusions not based on hard fact, in addition
to its intelligence conclusions; this is a repetition of an error in the
planning for the unsuccessful operation of last April.
The planning indicated herein will be revised, as necessary, based
on the hard intelligence estimate of the situation by the U.S. Intelligence
community. A new National Intelligence Estimate (NIE 85-62 on Cuba),
due on 23 January, apparently has been postponed until 7 February.
It is recognized that one result of the Project, so far, has been to
start the collection of Intelligence on Cuba in depth, to provide facts on
which to base firm estimates and operations.
IV. INITIAL PHASE
(30 Nov 61 - 18 Jan 62)
A. Establish a U.S. mechanism for the project.
Status: The President's directive of 30 November 1961 was imple-
mented by creating a U.S. operations team, with Brig. Gen. Lansdale
as Chief of Operations, and with tasks promptly assigned. His immedi-
ate staff are Mr. Hand and Major Patchell. Representatives of Secre-
taries and Agency Directors are:
State
Woodward (Goodwin, Hurwitch)
CLA
Helms
Defense - Brig. Gen. Craig
USLA
Wilson
B. Intelligence Support
Status: CLA made a special survey of U.S. capabilities to interrogate
Cuban refugees in the USA (1,700 2,000 arriving per month) and on
16 January approved a program increasing the staff at the Opa Locka
Interrogation_Center in Florida from the present 2 people to 34. CIA will
build up agent assets (positive intelligence assets inside Cuba are very
limited and it has no counter-intelligence assets inside). Special intelli-
gence assets will be exploited more fully. The Cuba project needs far
more hard intelligence in depth than is presently available. CIA will
require further assistance from Defense and other U.S. organizations
in this intelligence effort, and is submitting specific qualifications for
personnel on 19 January.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424903 Page 4
2
CUAICTTTVE
SENSITIVE
C. Political platform for peoples' movement inside Cuba.
Status: State has sketched in a broad outline. CLA is to produce
the firm platform statement of aims for which the Cubans who will
operate inside Cuba are willing to risk their lives, and upon which
popular support can be generated.
D. Nucleus for popular movement
Status: To date, CLA has been unable to produce the necessary
political action agents for this purpose. Upon re-evaluation of its
capabilities, CLA now hopes to complete spotting and assessing eight
to ten Cuban political action agents by 15 February, from among
Cubans available in the United States. The minimum need for the
Project to be effective is 30 such political action Cubans and CLA is
tasked to make a priority search for them among Cubans in the U.S.
and Caribbean area.
E. Deployment of nucleus
Status: CLA is tasked to select 20 localities within Cuba where
political action groups can be established. Initial selection and plans
for establishing these action groups are now due 1 February. Havana,
and localities in the provinces of Camaguey and Las Villas will receive
priority consideration, according to present intelligence. Planning on
this must be adjusted as firmer intelligence is acquired.
F. Diplomatic actions
Status: State is concentrating on the OAS Meeting of Foreign
Ministers, which opens 22 January, hoping to get wide Western Hemis-
phere support for OAS resolutions condemning Cuba and isolating it
from the rest of the Hemisphere. A companion resolution, to offer
OAS relief directly to the suffering Cuban people (similar to U.S.
relief to Russia, 1919-20) is being considered, as a means to reach
the Cuban people sympathetically without going through their Com-
munist government. The OAS meng is to be supported by public
demonstrations in Latin America menerated by CIA, and a psycho-
logical campaign assisted by USIA.
The major task for our diplomatic capability is to encourage Latin
American leaders to develop independent operations similar to this Pro-
ject, seeking an internal revolt of the Cuban people against the Communist
regime. This is yet to be initiated by State and must be vigorously pressed.
G. Economic warfare
Status: This critical key to our political action Project is still in the
planning stage under State leadership. State is basing future economic
actions, including plans for an embargo on Cuban trade, on the outcome
of the forthcoming OAS meeting. Meanwhile, State has chaired an Economic
action group, which agreed on developing 13 actions. 15 February is set for
a report on implementing plans, so that actions can be initiated CIA was
unable to undertake action to sabotage tine sugar harvest, which commences
about 15 January, and upon which Cuba's one-crop sugar economy depends
(Sabotage of transport, mills, sugar sacking and cane fields was explored.)
NW 50955 DocId: 32424903 Page 5
3
SENSITIVE
H. TV intrusion
Status Equipment to enable TV intrusion of Havana TV broadcasts
has beenvated on a small vessel under CLA control. CLA plans to
attempt intrusion on 22 Tartuary during Castro's forthcoming speech and
parade demonstrations.
I. Special sabotage support
Status State has explored, with negative results, the feasibility
of pre-en ve action with respect to tanker charters (most Bloc ship-
ments to Cuba are carried in Western bottoms). CIA has initiated
action to contaminate POL supplies for Cuba, although visible results
(stoppage of some Cuban transport) is not expected until mid-1962. CIA
is introducing "Lubzol," a corrosive additive, to Cuban, locomotive
diesel fuel oil through commercial suppliers in Belgium. It will be 4
months before the first locomotives break down. CIA expects to be able
to have at least one agent recruited by 28 February to attempt introduc-
tion of a corrosive additive to jet fuel storage tanks in Cuba.
J. Military actions
Status: Defense has been tasked with preparing a contingency plan
for U.S. military action, in case the Cuban people request U.S. help
when their revolt starts making headway. This contingency plan will
permit obtaining a policy decision on the major point of U.S. intentions,
and is looked upon as a positive political-psychological factor in a
people's revolt, even more than as a possible military action. Defense
also has been tasked with fully assisting State and CIA, as commitments
of Defense men, money, and materiel are required.
K. Major elements of the population
Status: Both State and CIA are continuing to explore their capabilities
(with results largely negative to date) for mounting special group operations
inside Cuba focused upon dynamic elements of the population, particularly
operations through the Church to reach the women and families, and
through Labor contacts to reach the workers. Other elements include
enlistment of the youth and professional groupings. Special consideration
is to be given to doing this through Latin American operational contacts.
This is vital to the success of our political action nucleus when CIA can
put it into place.
L. Outlook`
Status: As reported to the Special Group last week, there has been a
period of a realistic second look_at CIA capabilities to mount the required
clandestine operations against Cuba, and a subsequent start in "tooling up."
After this second look, CIA has concluded that its realistic role should be
to create at least the illusion of a popular movement, to win external support
for it, to improve CLA operational capability, and to help create a climate
which will permit provocative actions in support of a shift to overt action.
This outlook, although arrived at thoughtfully within CIA, is far short of
the Cuba project's goals. CLA must take yet another hard look at its
potential capabilities, in the light of the following tasking, to determine
if it cannot make the greater effort required.
NW 50955 DocId: 32424903 Page 6
4
SENSITIVE
A. Intelligence
Task 1: NIE 85-62 on Cuba due 7 February (CIA).
Task 2: By 15 February, Opa Locka Interrogation Center to be made
an effective operation for collection and processing of intelligence (CIA
with support of Defense, State, I&NS, FBI).
Task 3: Intelligence collection from Cuban refugees elsewe than
Mi area. CIA to survey other refugee points (Puerto Rico Venezuela.
etc. end end on a priority basis to ensure maximum coverage of such
source points. 15 February target date.
Task 4: CIA to continue its re-examination of intelligence assets,
with prigrity on agents inside Cuba, and report on capability by 15 Feb-
ruary Also included is coverage of intelligence through third country
source particularly those having diplomatic relations with Cuba
B. Political
Task 5: CIA to submit plan by 1 February for defection of top Cuban
government officials, to fracture the regime from within. This effort
must be imaginative and bold enough to consider a "name" defector to
be worth at least a million U.S. dollars. This can be the key to our
political action goal and must be mounted without delay as a major CIA
project.
Task 6: CIA to complete plans by 1 February for Cover and Decep-
tion actions, to help fracture the Communist regime in Cuba. Defense,
State and FBI are to collaborate on this.
Task 7: Byl February, CIA to submit operations schedule for
initiating popular movement within Cuba. This must include localities
selected inside Cuba, assessment of selected Cubans, their infiltra-
tion, activity assignments, and political platform. One section must
deal with the "underground," assess its true status and plans to use it.
Task 8: State to follow up the OAS meeting by having U.S.
Embassies in Latin America exploit all opportunities to enlist local
sympathy_for the Cuban people and to increase hostility towards the
Communist regime in Cuba. State to submit report on results of this
assignment by 13 February, so further planning can be programmed.
Task 9: By 15 February, State to submit an inventory of operational
assets in the Caribbean area, including capabilities of local governments
or groups to mount operations on their own, to help achieve the Project's
goals. Plans for early use of such capabilities are due by 19 February.
Task 10: CIA to submit operational schedule for using assets in the
Caribbean area to achieve the Project's political action goals. The
objective of working on dynamic elements of the Cuban population (such
as workers, farmers) is underscored. Due 19 February.
C. Economic
Task 11: State to prepare recommendations to the President on
U.S. trade with Cuba, as follow-up to OAS meeting. (If the minimum
result of the meeting is an agreement to condemn Cuba as an accom-
plice of the Sino-Soviet Bloc and adoption of a general statement that
Cuba presents a threat to the peace and security of the Hemisphere,
State is prepared to recommend to the President that remaining trade
between the U.S. and Cuba be barred.)
Task 12: State to plan, with Commerce and other U.S. agencies,
on how to halt the diversion of vital items in the Cuban trade. Due
date 15 February. Cooperation of other OAS nations, particularly
Canada and Mexico, is to be explored by State.
Task 13: State, with Commerce and others involved, to plan on
how to make "positive list" items to Latin America be subject to the
same licensing procedures as applied to such shipments to other
parts of the free world. Due 15 February.
Task 14: State to obtain from Commerce proposal to amend
present export controls of technical data (petrochemical, communi-
cations equipment) so that Cuba is treated the same as the Sino-
Soviet Bloc. Due 15 February.
Task 15: State by 15 February to submit recommendations on
issuance of transportation order (T-3) under authority of the Defense
Production Act of 1950 forbidding U.S.-owned vessels to engage in
trade with Cuba.
Task 16: State plan due by 15 February on feasible extension of
U.S. port treatment now given to Bloc and Cuban vessels to charter
vessels of Bloc and Cuba (Treasury to advise on this).
Task 17: State to report by 15 February on feasibility of harass-
ing Bloc shipping by refusing entry into U.S. ports (statedly for
security reasons), if vessels have called or will call at Cuban ports.
Task 18 CIA to report on possibility of cooperation of AFL-CIO
with the Inte Thabones Transport Federation to refuse to handle cargo
for or from Cuba. bue by 15 February.
Task 19: State to report by 15 February on possibilities for
obtaining the discreet cooperation of the National Foreign Trade
Council to urge U.S. shippers to refuse to ship on vessels which call
at Cuban ports. (Commerce to assist on this.)
Task 20: State to report by 15 February on possibilities to obtain
the discreet cooperation of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the
National Association of Manufacturers to influence U.S. firms having
subsidaries abroad to adhere to the spirit of U.S. economic sanctions.
(Commerce to assist on this.)
Task 21: CIA to submit plan by 15 February for inducing failures
in food crops in Cuba. Capability for sabotage of rice, for instance,
is available; timing is the problem.
Task 22: State to report by 15 February on status of plans to
gain cooperation of NATO allies (bilaterally and in the NATO forum,
as appropriate). Objective is to persuade these nations to take steps
to isolate Cuba from the West.
Task 23: State to report by 15 February on status of actions under-
taken with Japan, which has comparatively significant trade with Cuba,
along lines similar to those with NATO nations.
Task 24: CLA to submit plan by 15 February on disruption of the
supply of Cuban nickel to the Soviet Union. CIA will specifically con-
sider how to block the Soviets from re-opening their supply of nickel
from Canada. (Canadian contract was terminated when the Cuban
supply became available to the Soviets.)
D. Psychological
Task 25: USIA to submit plan by 15 February for the most
effective psychological exploitation of actions undertaken in the
Project, towards the end result of awakening world sympathy for
the Cuban people (as a David) battling against the Communist regime
(as a Goliath) and towards stimulating Cubans inside Cuba to join "the
cause."
Task 26: CIA to submit by 15 February its operational schedule
for a psychological campaign to provoke a relaxing of police state
control within Cuba. This is to include effective means of publicly
indicting "people's criminals" for justice after liberation of Cuba
(not only individual top officials, but members of the Vigilancia, etc.).
Task 27: CIA and USIA will report on progress as of 15 February
in developing identification of the popular movement inside Cuba, as
with songs, symbols, propaganda themes.
Task 28: By 15 February CIA will report on plans and actions
for propaganda support of the popular movement inside Cuba. Included
will be exactly what is planned for use by the movement inside Cuba,
Cand feasibility of using smuggled food packets (such as the "I Shall
"Return" cigarette packets to Philippine guerrillas in World War II)
as morale boosters in generating the popular movement.
E. Military Action
Task 29: Defense to submit contingency plan for use of U.S.
military force to support the Cuban popular movement, including a
statement of conditions under which Defense believes such action would
be required to win the Project's goal and believes such action would not
necessarily lead to general war. Due 28 February.
Task 30: CIA to submit by 15 February its operational schedule
for sabotage actions inside Cuba, including timing proposed for the
actions and how they effect the generation and support of a popular
movement, to achieve the Project goals.
Task 31: CIA to submit specific requests to Defense for required
support by Defense as early as possible after its plans firm up. Requests
for all major needs are expected by 23 February.
Task 32: Defense will submit plan for "special operations" use of
Cubans enlisted in the U.S. armed forces. Due 28 February.
VI. FUTURE PLANS
By 20 February, it is expected that sufficient realistic plans for
individual tasks will have been received, and initial actions started, to
permit a firm time-table to be constructed. Since the President directed
that the Chief of Operations conduct the Project through the appropriate
organizations and Departments of the Government, and since these U.S.
organizations are mainly in the initial inventory and development of
capabilities phase concerning assigned tasks, a precise operations time -
table as of today would be too speculative to be useful.
CIA has alerted Defense that it will require considerable military
supportsacluding two submarines, PT boats, Coast Guard type cutters,
Speciales trainers, C-54 aircraft, F-86 aircraft, amphibian air-
craft, helio-couriers, Army leaflet battalion, and Guantanamo as a base
for submarine operations Also, CIA apparently believes that its role
should be to create andpind a popular movement, illusory and actual,
which will create a political climate which can provide a framework of
plausible excuse for armed intervention. This is not in conformity with
the Presidential directive now governing Projecttasking. Actually, the
'role of creating the political climate and plausible excuse for armed
intervention would be more properly that of State and Defense, if such
an objective becomes desirable.
Distribution:
SENSITIVE
Copy No.
1.
The President
2.
The Attorney General
3.
The Military Assistant to the President, General Taylor
4.
The Secretary of State (and Deputy Under Secretary Johnson)
5.
The Secretary of Defense (and Deputy Secretary Gilpatric)
6.
The Director, Central Intelligence
7.
The Director, USIA
8.
The Department of State Project Officer, Assistant Secretary
Woodward and Mr. Hurwitch
9.
The Department of Defense Project Officer, Brig. Gen. Craig,
(who will inform the Chairman, JCS)
10.
The CIA Project Officer, Mr. Helms
11.
The USIA Project Officer, Deputy Director Wilson
12-14.
Brig. Gen. Lansdale

