JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY : CIA
RECORD NUMBER: 104-10332-10009
RECORD SERIES : JFK
AGENCY FILE NUMBER : PROJFILES-DECLASS STDS
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
AGENCY ORIGINATOR: CIA
Date: 03/14/05
FROM :
TO :
TITLE: ARRB-CIA ISSUE: YURI NOSENKO
DATE: 05/30/1978
PAGES: 76
SUBJECTS : NOSENKO YURI
JFK ASSASSINATION
UNIT INDEX
ARRB ISSUE
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER
CLASSIFICATION: SECRET
RESTRICTIONS: 1A 1B
CURRENT STATUS :
RELEASED IN PART PUBLIC RELEASED WITH DELETIONS
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 04/01/03
COMMENTS : JFK-M-17
INDEX: F10 : 2000.02.14.15:37:00:280044 : UNIT
4 PAGES DIF.
(
Released under the John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act of
1992 (44 USC 2107 Note). Case#:NW
65360 Date: 06-01-2023
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED 104-10332-10009
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 1
SECRET Fldelle
APPROVED FOR RELEASE 1993
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
OGC 78-3595
5-31-78
Executive Registry
78-8432/11
OLC 78-1012/8 JUN 5 10 04 AH 78.
30 May 1978
TOPE SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
KELEASE IN FULL
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence 2000
VIA : Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
FROM : S. D. Breckinridge
Principal Coordinator, HSCA
Office of Legislative Counsel
SUBJECT: House Select Committee on Assassinations
Request for Access to the "Hart Report"
1. Action Requested: That you approve the recommendation at
paragraph 14 for limited access of selected House Select Committee
on Assassinations (HSCA) staff members to a classified, sanitized
version of the Hart Report.
2. Background: As you know, the HSCA Staff Director, Mr. Blakey,
has requested you in a letter dated 9 May 1978 (Tab A), to provide access
to a report prepared by John Hart in 1977 on the subject of the Agency's
handling of the Nosenko case. This request is part of an inquiry into
hypotheses arising from Epstein's book Legend, in which the view is
presented that Nosenko was a dispatched agent with the mission of
concealing KGB ties with Lee Harvey Oswald. Central to HSCA interest
is the question of Nosenko's bona fides. Additional to that issue, interest
has developed in the manner in which Nosenko was treated during the period
that his bona fides were suspect. These two issues are treated separately
below.
I
3. The Hart report is directed at the handling of the Nosenko case,
addressing the actions and conduct of various officers in the Agency. These
matters cannot be treated without also considering the question of Nosenko's
bona fides, so there also is considerable review of the methodology employed
and the analyses of those handling the matter. Mr. Blakey states in his
letter that he has been informed that the report contains no information on
the issues of bona fides, being concerned instead only with personnel and
internal procedures. This understanding on his part is incorrect, and
his letter suggests that he himself has reservations about it.
SECRET
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 2
#05248
SECRET
4. The Agency has made available to the HSCA two studies conducted
in 1967 and 1963 by SE Division, both of which questioned Nosenko's
bona fides. A subsequent study by the Office of Security in 1968 has also
been made available; it reached a conclusion contrary to the preceding
studies and supports Nosenko's bona fides. Other Soviet defectors have been
interviewed by the HSCA staff, as well as knowledgeable CIA officers and
retirees. As a result, much of the information on the case has been
revealed to the Committee.
5. The two SE Division studies, concluding that Nosenko was a KGB
agent, were superceded by the Office of Security study, which prevailed.
The HSCA investigators reportedly have problems with how the earlier two
studies could be rejected so shortly after their completion. As a result,
the HSCA seems focused on the issues as viewed at that time. The Hart
report has the advantage of having been prepared after a ten year period,
during which experience with the validity of Nosenko's information provides
the basis for an objective re-examination. It is relevant to HSCA interests
that the Hart Report constitutes a convincing statement of the bona fides
of Nosenko. Access to this portion of the Hart Report would help broaden
and complete the understanding of the HSCA of the matter.
6. Because of the above, the Agency has everything to gain and nothing
to lose in providing the Hart Report for its review of the issue of Nosenko's
bona fides. :
:
II
7. In addition to the central issue of Nosenko's bona fides, Chairman
Stokes has expressed interest in the treatment accorded Nosenko during the
period that his bona fides were in question. Nosenko reportedly has provided
the HSCA with some detail on this. We have made the point that how
Nosenko was treated was a result of the issue, not a part of it. When we
questioned the relevance of this line of inquiry to the HSCA charter,
HSCA staff representatives assert that their charter extends to the conduct
of the intelligence agencies in the Warren Commission inquiry which
includes this. The rationale appears a bit contrived and stretched in terms
of the real issues. How Nosenko was treated may indicate how concerned
CIA was with the man's bona fides, but so far as relating further to the
inquiry concerning President Kennedy's assassination, it seems marginal at
best. The rationale is so far-fetched that we have been led to consider that its
dramatic qualities are attractive for the projected TV spectacular this
coming September. It also doubtless provides an opportunity for public
criticism for those staff members who have been acknowledged by Mr.
Plakey as hostile to the Agency.
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 3
2
SECRET
8. If the rationale of the HSCA for pursuing the question of
Nosenko's treatment is contrived, and largely peripheral to the real
purpose of the Committee, as we believe it to be, it should be faced
in those terms. No one would disagree with there being relevant
inquiries, but it is hardly proper to take an internal critique and turn
it against the Agency on a point irrelevant to the central purpose of the
inquiry. The HSCA staff position is tendentious, and reflects on its
face a hostile attitude that the Committee may not otherwise want to be
so obvious. The Committee has the right to determine what is relevant
to its charter, but the Agency should also assert a similar right to defend
itself from truly peripheral and hostile fishing expeditions.
9. Therefore, while we believe that the Hart Report should be made
available to the HSCA staff, we do not believe that such action should be
taken prior to attempting to limit the use made of information contained
in the Report not related to the issue of Nosenko's bona fides.
III
10. There are aspects of the Hart Report that contain information on
foreign liaison services that should not be exposed to the HSCA. There is,
therefore, a question of some sanitization to be conducted prior to the
Report's being made available.
11. A version of the Report has been prepared for the FBI in which the
names of employees below the DCI have been removed, as well as certain
modifications in more dramatic rhetorical phrases. That version is in
other respects faithful to the original Report. It provides a working basis
for further sanitization. Sanitization prior to review is not foreign to the
HSCA, as the Directorate of Operations has had a continuing policy of
selected sanitization. Extending this practice to the Hart Report would
be consistent with the extant working relationship with HSCA. The Report
will remain classified.
12. If the paper is made available, classified and sanitized, it should be
on a highly restricted basis; the HSCA wants six named persons to have
access to it, which is at least three times the number needed for bona fide
research purposes.
13. Staff Position: This paper favors making a sanitized version of the
paper, in classified form, available to a limited number of the HSCA staff
representatives at the CIA Headquarters Building at Langley. Any such
release should be preceded by appropriate discussions limiting use of the
material by the Committee. The General Counsel is of the opinion (Tab B)
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 4
3
SECRET
that if the paper is withheld, and a court test results, the Agency
must expect to fail in withholding the paper. The Office of the General
Counsel, the Office of Security, SE Division and CI Staff favor making the
paper available under the conditions set forth above.
14. Recommendation: That you approve granting access to a limited
number of staff members of the HSCA to a classified, sanitized version of
the Hart Report. Such access shall be conditioned on agreement to limit
use of materials contained in the Report to those matters relating to the
question of Nosenko's bona fides.
Attachments
CONCURRENCE:
SIGNED
General Counsel
31 MAY 1978
Date
Chief, SE Division
Date
Chief, CI Staff
Date
Director of Security
1
JUN 1978
Date
/s/ Front de Carlos
APPROVAL:
Director of Central Intelligence
Date
ISAPPROVAL:
Director of Central Intelligence
Date
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 5
4
SECRET
SUBJECT: House Select Committee on Assassinations
Request for Access to the "Hart Report"
Distribution:
Orig - Adse
1 - DDCI
1 - ER
1 - OGC
1 - C/SE Div
1 - C/CI Staff
1 - SA/DO/0
1 - D/OS
1 - OLC/Subj
1 - OLC/Chrono
OLC/SDB/ksn (30 May 78)
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 6
1
CIA SPEC
X
КеспONS
11 March 1993
REEBAGXIN PULL
NOTE FOR: Deputy Director for Operations
FROM: Peter Earnest
Chief, Media Relations
SUBJECT: WASHINGTON POST Request to Talk to an Agency
Specialist on the Kennedy Assassination
The WASHINGTON POST is preparing a series of articles on
the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the Kennedy
assassination.
With the help of CIC, we recently arranged for George
Lardner and Walter Pincus of the WASHINGTON POST to interview
former KGB officer Yuri Nosenko about his knowledge of Lee
Harvey Oswald during the time Oswald lived in the Soviet
Union. To ensure that Nosenko's resettlement identity and
location would remain protected, I made the arrangements for
Nosenko to come to Washington for the interview.
The POST reimbursed Nosenko for expenses and paid him a
$250 consulting fee. The interview was done on Wednesday,
3 March, at the POST offices downtown. I did not remain for
it. Lardner and Pincus also hosted a lunch for Nosenko which
was attended by Ben Bradlee. Lardner and Pincus were very
pleased with their session with Nosenko and appreciative of
our making it possible. I also spoke afterwards with Nosenko
who said he was satisfied with how the interview was
conducted and with the financial arrangements.
Shortly after the interview, Lardner faxed me a list of
the questions that he and Pincus had prepared for themselves
to use in checking out Nosenko's information. They asked if
there was anyone at the Agency they could talk to about the
individuals named. I told them that developing information
in response to their questions would probably take a good
deal of research and that I doubted the Agency would be able
to take on such a task at this time for the POST However, I
said I would take it up with the appropriate offices.
Although I told the POST that I do not believe anyone
would be willing to undertake research on their questions,
I'm wondering if there is anyone around who might be
knowledgeable of Nosenko's information who would be willing
to talk with Lardner and Pincus on background based on
his/her existing knowledge. I think Lardner and Pincus would
be grateful for making such a person available even if
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 7
SUBJECT: WASHINGTON POST Request
all their questions aren't answered. Considering that they
are trying to do serious research on the Kennedy
assassination, I think any effort on our part to help them
would be seen as a gesture of good will.
Attachment:
As stated
Peter Earnest
Agree to having a specialist talk to them on background
about the Nosenko information if an appropriate person is
available.
No, do not want anyone from the DO talking about the
Nosenko information.
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 8
SUBJECT: WASHINGTON POST Request to Talk to an Agency
specialist in the Kennedy Assassination
DCI/PAI/Earnest:ncbx37758 (11 March 1993)
Distribution:
Original
Addressee
1
ADDO
1
SA/DDO
1
DO Registry
1
D/PAI
1
D/DO/CIC
1
C/DO/NROC
1
C/DO/CE
1 C/CSI
1
C/History Staff
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 9
Names of Russians we should try to track down about Lee Harvey Oswald, Yuri Nosenko and the
JFK assassination:
1. General Oleg M. Gribanor, head of the Second Chief Directorate of the KGB in the early 1960s
where Nosenko says he worked, primarily against American tourists, as deputy chief of the Seventh
Department. Nosenko described himself as sort of favored by Gribanov and he said Gribanov in-
structed him, after the JFK assassination, to retrieve the Oswald file from the Minsk KGB right
away.
2. Anatoliy Koralenko, deputy chief of the Second Chief Directorate or one of its departments, at
time of JFK assassination. Nosenko said when the file arrived from Minski, he and Koralenko were
going over the all-important first volume--and finding KGB had nothing to do with Oswald-when a
KGB officer from the First Department came in and picked it up on Gribanov's orders, to review it
and write a summary of it.
3. The officer who picked it up was Col. Matveer, deputy chief(I think) of First(or American) De-
partment, Second Chief Directorate. Unhave first name.
4. Chief of this First Department was Col. Sergei M. Fedoseyer or Fedoseer and presumably he
would have had a hand in or supervised preparation of the "spravka" or summary.
5. Gribanov and more than 40 other KGB officers were kicked out because of Nosenko's defection,
according to Nosenko. That right? What happened?
6. Maj. Georgi Rastrusin. Was in 1959 a senior case officer in KGB responsible for Intourist mat-
ters. Nosenko says that it was Rastrusin who told him about Oswald and how he wanted to stay in
Soviet Union. Nosenko said Rastrusin said Oswald "doesn't present interest" to KGB and Nosenko
checked out with his superiors. Word came back not to bother with Oswald. Nosenko was told to tell
Rastrusin to tell Intourist to deal with him.
7. Rastrusin returned next day and said we got a problem. Oswald tried to kill self, etc. KGB
washed hands of him, decided to let Intourist deal with him. Intourist then part of Ministry of For-
eign Trade. Nosenko said he believes question of what to do with Oswald was run to top of that min-
istry and beyond, to Khruschev or one of his deputies. In any case, decision was made to let Oswald
stay in Minsk. But not, Nosenko says, by KGB.
8. In the fall of 1963, a KGB colleague, M. I. Turalin, Service No. 2(counterintelligence in foreign
countries), First Chief Directorate, told Nosenko orally that Mexico City station had just sent a cable
about a request by Oswald for a visa to re-enter Soviet Union. What should be done?
Nosenko said he said, 'wait a second. How come he's back in America?" At that point, Nosenko said
he hadn't know Oswald had gone back.
9. Nosenko said he said let's go to chief of department who he identified as a Col. Chelnekov or
Cheinenko(but later seemed to say his timing might be off and somebody else may have been chief of
Nosenko's department at the time). In any case, Nosenko quoted chief as saying, in effect, I remem-
ber this crazy nut. No. No. No. Tell them we don't have any interest.'
Cable back to Mexico City advising KGB there get rid of Oswald by telling him to go back to his
own country and apply for a visa at Soviet Embassy in Washington, etc., etc.
10. Col. Gruzder, was chief of the KGB department in Minsk that was responsible for foreigners
there.
11. Olex Nechiporenko, one of three KGB officers stationed in Mexico City who reportedly inter-
rogated or dealt with Oswald on his visit to Embassy there. Now living in Moscow area.
Other two Mexico City officers, both still alive in Russia: Valeriy Kostikov and Pavel Yatzkov.
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 10
Memo to: C/HRG
3 March 1994
Subject: Mangold Litigation
Today I alerted OGC (Theresa Wilcox/Kathy Kelly) that
the JFK collections contains a significant number of
documents on Nosenko (5-6000 pages) which may impact on the
Mangold litigation. As I understand it, the Mangold
Litigation is over the Angelton files and is several years
old. According to JFK reviewers at the FBI, documents on
Nosenko's defection and treatment are part of case. I
talked with Theresa Wilcox who is the para-legal handling
the litigation, however, she was not familiar with the
documents involved. She will consult with Kelly, the lawyer
on the case, and get back to me.
I consider the ball in OGC's court. I propose that we
continue to review the Nosenko files. If there are Mangold
or other consideration to address, we can do so after the
HRG review is complete.
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 11
Barry
Re: NOSENKO
Davesigencemed Buy 45
note several Reports, not completely
identified as to author.
(1) "Conclusions • & Comments in de Case of of
Yuriy I. Nosenko "Cr) (ile Salie Report -26урер.
"Cile
(This is ni Box 45, FOLDER 8)
( Las been released in JFK/-JFK62-F9
It concludes
I
NOSENKO S 9000)
2). "Case of Yury rosene" (835 pruge stuck)
daled Felnica 1967
(no indication lat I los been released)
(Believe it was prepared in SB (perlups
in
- on
by Bagley - on perlaps wilt CT/STAFF)
(canludes
ROSERRE LA BAD
(3) "The Examination of de Bona Dades of a
263 Defect" -TS # 197124
(447 pages)
aaled FEBRUARY 1968
es found in ORIS BOX 62 JFR-FLD9)
This is found in
Mws released.
except for ANNEXA
which is
fuund in Box 45 F. 23.
WIFS
(A concludes NOSENKO
NOT
Bona fide)
Don't Knoir aithorn):
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 12
Jul
Memorandum For: C/HRG
INTERNAL USE ONLY
23 March 1994
Subject: Nosenko and the Mangold Litigation
I received a call from Kathy Kelly, OGC, this morning
concerning the Nosenko files in the JFK files. I described
the files again (about 4000+ pages that include transcripts
of all his interrogations and numerous studies on his bona
fides and treatment by the Agency including the Solie and
Hart reports and an 835 page comprehensive study). Since
Nosenko is an important figure in the JFK assassination
story and the files are part of the sequestered collection,
HRG is reviewing the files under the JFK Assassination
Records Collections Act. However, we were aware that some
of the documents were part of the Mangold litigation and
wanted to make sure that they were properly coordinated.
Kathy Kelly said that the Mangold litigation should not be a
factor in HRG's review. If the files were subject to the
JFK Records Act, they should be processed under that Act.
When the review is complete, a list of the documents
released should be provide so that OGC can treat them the
same in the Mangold case.
I also talked with Kathy Stricker (yesterday) to get some
background on the handling of Nosenko files and what were
the "secrets" given what we know is publicly available. She
said for years the agency "glomared" Nosenko except for the
Oswald information: however, once Golitsyn became public
that ended. Today, the battle over his bona fides and how
he was treated are public knowledge. The Agency up until a
couple years ago had not released some of the studies (she
mention Solie) but she was not sure that this was still the
case or if it was possible to continue to deny them. DO has
protected the information provided by Nosenko on other
Soviet sources and leads for possible recruitment. This
type of information should continue to be protected.
Kathy Stricker's comments are consistent with HRG's handling
of the Nosenko files. We are considering all of the files
as related; his bona fides is a key element of the story and
there was a large amount of information including parts of
the studies on him in both the Oswald 201 and the JFK hard
copy collection. We have deleted information provided on
other sources and operations not related to the JFK story.
We are also recommending release of the rest of the studies.
Although they contain potentially embarrassing information
for the Agency (as did the IG report on the Castro plots),
there doesn't appear to be grounds for denying under the JFK
Act.
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 13
SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
Restrictions on Declassifying Material on Yuriy Ivanovich
NOSENKO
The following should be used as guidelines in
declassifying material files pertaining to the career and
"bona fides" of Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
1. CIA Knowledge of Russian intelligence tradecraft.
Specific information in the files about KGB targetting of
American citizens could reveal to the Russian Intelligence
service our knowledge of their tradecraft. Since the
Russian services continue to target Americans, this
information should continue to be protected.
2. To protect a CIA asset. Yuriy Ivanovich NOSENKO
remains an asset of this agency, and is under contract.
Moreover, the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service (SVRR)
remains interested in NOSENKO's whereabouts and activities.
Russian intelligence services since the Second World War
have tried to track their defectors. There are indications
that the Russian services remain interested in the NOSENKO
case.
At the time of his arrest, Rick Ames had some
NOSENKO files in his possession.
The US
Counterintelligence Community is unsure if this
material was passed to the Russian service.
--Following NOSENKO's brother and mother's visit to the
United States, both were questionned by the Russian
service about NOSENKO's activity and place and
residence.
5/94
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 14
JFK Act 5 (g) (2) (D)
SECRET
CIA INTERNAL USE ONLY
trom
Legal posit
DOS. TA
CI.
SEP 16 '94 09:50AM
Mr.Robert Pringle
2909 Rock Manor Court
Herndon, Virginia 22071
P.3/4
Dear Bob,
It was very good to meet with you again in Washington on June 12.
I am writing to confirm our recent conversation about the CIA's release
of documents about me to the National Archives. As I explained to you at
cur meeting, I am very displeased that this was done without my knowled-
ge and especially since my photograph was officially released by the
Agency for the first time in thirty years.
As you know, it has come to my attention that the CIA released these
many hundreds of pages to the public without consulting me or telling
me that this was going to be done. I have already seen copies of two of
these reports totalling more than 700 pages. One is the October 1968
report supporting me by Bruce Solie; the other was a February 1968 re-
port by the CI Staff which attacked my credibility. (This latter report
contains a copy of my photo from the late 1960s. I consider this a breach
of my personal security.)
I also consider many of the details in both of these reports to be of a
very personal nature. Other pages deal with with some very sensitive
cases which I gave the Agency about other people. The information in
these reports was given freely and accurately by me to the CIA officers
in the 1960s under terms of strict confidentiality. Although it is very
difficult for me to say this, I feel that my trust in the Agency has now
been seriously damaged.
This release particularly troubles me because for the past thirty years
I have remained very loyal to the Agency and considerate of its wishes.
For instance, despite many requests, I have only spoken to a few jouré
nalists, and only when the Agency advised me toso. I have never sought
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 15
SEP 16 '94 09:51AM
Page 2
P.4/4
en my own to publish my story in an article or book. But now, the CIA
' has not returned this courtesy. Instead, it has released sensitive
information to the public without speaking to me first.
Under the circumstances, I would like to respectfully request the
following:
1. That you show this letter to DDO Ted Price, Director James Woolsey,
and the current heads of the CIA's Freedom of Information Office and
Historical Review staff -- -- so that they are aware of what has happened.
i
2. I would like to receive, in writing, an explanation from these res-
ponsible. of why this release was done.
5. I would like to receive a list of the major reports about me which
have already been released. Aside from the twe reports that I already
have seen, I would like to receive copies of any other major studies
that have been released. (For instance, if there are reports released
by Peter Bagley, Newton Miler, James Angleton, the CI Staff and John
Hart, then I would like to see them as well.)
4. I would like to be given the Agency's written assurance that further
releases will not ecour without consulting me first.
Bab, you should know that before I wrote this letter I have speken
about this matter with my geed friend George Kalaris. He too was troub-
led by what I told him, and he advised me that I should ask the Agency
for an explanation.
Beb, I apologize fer troubling you with this matter, but I have no one
else to turn to fer assistance.
Please let me know if there is any respense as soon as possible.
Respectfully yours,
:
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 16
SEP 16 '94 09:50AM
Secret
Draft letter to Nosenko from the DDO
CLA SPECIAL COLLECTIONS
RELEASE IN FULL
2000
Dear
The Director has asked me to respond to your letter
expressing concern that US Government declassification of
material could compromise your privacy and security.
In regard to your question about the documents that have
already been released, rest assured that I have directed
officers responsible for FOIA requests to take special care
in reviewing information concerning you in light of your
special circumstances. We will make full use of all™™
possible exceptions to FOIA-mandated declassification in
order to protect your privacy.
Records Collection Act, which required all US Government
agencies to release any records related to the assassination of the
of President Kennedy. As Deputy Director for Operations, I
am of course committed to fully supporting the DCI in
meeting this requirement, but I also appreciate your concern
about the files on you that are related to the
assassination. I have therefore directed a senior officer
Historic
Review historical staff who are involved in the declassification
GROUP
program. This officer has had extensive discussions with
members of the staff and has worked closely with them to
Identify those portions of the files that include personal
and operational information.
taken specia was to perdert an
As a result of this effort, we have (postponed-release-of-any
Sensitive information touching on your private life or on operational
Under the JFK
information pertaining to your debriefings.
law, a Presidential Review Board will make the final
decision on the disposition of the material. This Agency
values the sacrifices you have made for our country, and we
will present the Board with the strongest possible case for
protecting information that could affect your privacy and
security.
:
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 17
Best wishes,
UNCLASSIFIED
17 April 1997
Sue Amiano, SA/CIC, gave to Gary Brenneman to give to Barry
Harrelson, Historical Review Group, X31825, 2 soft files
entitled:
1. "WARREN COMMISSION/OSWALD"
2. "DOCUMENTS YURI Ivanovich NOSENKO/OSWALD"
found by Al Bonner in the vault.
17-APRIL-97
Received
Cisky M. BRONOMAN
UNCLASSIFIED
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 18
Administrative - HRG Internal Use Only
CIA SPECTAN COLLECTIONS
RELEAN IN FULL
2008
30 April 1997
Note To: ARRB Staff
Subject: 1. CIC Soft files:
2. Documents Yuri Ivanovich NOSENKO/Oswald
Warren Commission/Oswald
The attached files were located in CIC. They are soft
(or working) files containing information on Nosenko, Warren
Commission and Oswald. It is not clear if the files.date
from the Warren Commission period, or were created in
1975/76 (latest date of documents) in response to a request
or investigation.
Most of the documents are in the sequestered collection
(OGC folders). The other documents may be in the Norsènko
material put aside for discussion with the ARRB or in the
Microfilm part of the sequestered material (the Microfilm is
not indexed document by document).
Administrative - HRG Internal Use Only
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 19
Administrative - HRG Internal Use Only
30 April 1997
Note for the Record
Subject: CIC Oswald/Nosenko related soft files:
1. Warren Commission/Oswald
2. Documents Yuri Ivanovich NOSENKO/Oswald
I advised Sue Amiano, SA/CIC, that most of the
documents in the two folders are duplicates of documents in
the CIA JFK Collection sequestered by the HSCA. The other
documents are related to Nosenko, but do not mention Oswald.
These documents are probably duplicated in the Nosenko
material set aside for discussion with the ARRB. I
recommended that we make the folders available to the ARRB
staff. She concurred.
2. Documents will be made available to Michelle Combs,
ARRB staff, on her next visit.
Barry
Administrative - HRG Internal Use Only
NW 65360 Docld:32404522 Page 20
SECRET
TO:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Eileen M Wukitch
James W. Zirkle
08/01/97 09:54:03
Re: The Nosenko Papers
CL BY:
CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1
DRV FROM: HUM 4-82
Site
JFK Act 5 (g)(2)(D)
Eileen: Let me introduce myself. I am CIC/Legal. C/CIC asked me to touch base with you
concerning any possible ARRB release of privacy information concerning Nosenko. While we are
aware that such a decision to release is within the Board's discretion, we do believe that the
Agency, when giving this information over to them, should request that the Board_protect such
information to the maximum extent possible. If I can be of help in that regard just let me know.
Jim
From the Desk of Dennis D. Lamb
NOTE FOR:
FROM:
DATE:
SUBJECT:
Ron L Seckinger
Dennis De Lamb
07/31/97 10:44:28
The Nosenko Papers
CL BY: 0790429
CL REASON: 1.5(c)
DECL ON: X1
DRV FROM: HUM 4-82
At about 1020 hrs on Tuesday, 31 July, I received a call from Eileen Wukitch of the Agency's
External Support Group/Historical Collection Staff regarding Michelle Combs's interest in reviewing
the Nosenko papers for the upcoming meeting of the Assassination Records Review Board (ARRB)
on 5 August. Wukitch said Combs, an ARRB staffer, is planning on taking 20 pages of the Nosenko
material with her. Wukitch wants to know whether we would like copies of the material Combs is
taking. I said yes. Wukitch said Combs appears understanding of our concerns in this case and to
this end wanted the following questions answered so she could put a human touch on our concerns
in explaining our position to the ARRB.
1. Is Nosenko married? (No one in CIC/AG knows.)
2. What part of the country is he living in? (This is known, but I can't see why she or the
ARRB needs to know.)
3. Did the Soviets actually sentence Nosenko to death? Or was this just his claim. (No one
in CIC/AG know, but it appears reasonable to assume that the Soviets did sentence him to death.)
4. Nosenko's current age? (No one in CIC/AG knows off