JFK ASSASSINATION SYSTEM
IDENTIFICATION FORM
Date: 09/30/93
Page:1
AGENCY INFORMATION
AGENCY: SSCIA
RECORD NUMBER : 157-10002-10056
RECORDS SERIES :
MEMORANDUM
AGENCY FILE NUMBER :
DOCUMENT INFORMATION
ORIGINATOR : CIA
FROM: SCHLESINGER, ARTHUR JR
TO: THE PRESIDENT
TITLE :
CIA REORGANIZATION
CIA
DATE: 06/10/61
PAGES : 15
SUBJECTS :
Released under the John F. Kennedy
Assassination Records Collection Act
of 1992 (44 USC 2107 Note).
Case#:NW 65360 Date: 06-01-2023
COVERT ACTION
PARAMILITARY WARFARE
CUBA
POLICY CONTROL
DOCUMENT TYPE: PAPER, TEXTUAL DOCUMENT
CLASSIFICATION : S
RESTRICTIONS: REFERRED
CURRENT STATUS: P
DATE OF LAST REVIEW : 09/30/93
OPENING CRITERIA :
:
COMMENTS:
Box 244
Folder 7
Exhibit 5 to R. Goodwin testimony on 7/18/75
:
[R] ITEM IS RESTRICTED
NW 65360 Docld:32281896 Page 1
SECRET
B
(2) (1)
(2)(1)
10. Sperations and aplicy
3.
Clandestina activitice ahould be accessed aut caly in the context
of their relationshty to an open secloty but ales in the context of their
ratatianabip to United States foroign policy.
CIA operations have not been bald effectively enboratoate to U. 8.
foreign policy.
1. Clandestine intelligence collection in, by charter, from from
This fact exposes American foreign policy
State Department control.
vua moititrón of embarrassinents when CIA is diecovered recruiting
agente or developing sources in a friendly country. The recen
Singapore case, whon CIA, without notice to the Consul General,
triod to submert a member of the Spacial Eranch of the Singaporo
Police provides an instructiva example. After complications of
Ivdicrous conglezity, including an attempt to subject the recruit to
a He-detector test, it twned out that the recruit and long since
Infermed bia superiere of the CIA approach and was leading CIA
imo a trep which, when spring, produced consideratio embarrass-
want to relatiens between the US and the Gingapore government
There have been treaties of a comparable rart in Pakistan вод and in
| Japan (where a group Слипонo Nationele veraferniggled tato S
4 NOV 97 hoor in a CIA-N3A0062ation).
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Ranass'n
Cindass'n Change/classify to
With concurrence of
Declassify In part and excise as shown
CAKE 12356, See-13(a) (81)
FPC/HDR by
匕
CIA bas caid that, in such cases, neither the Embassy nor the Dapari.
ment in Washington is normally formed of this type of operation.
In short, no one knows how many potential prekliams for UB foreiga
policy -- and how each potentiel friction with friendly states -- are
being created at this moment by CIA clandestina Intelligence opereiion
Surely there is on argument fex permitting Stats to drcide whether the
advantage to be joined by the operation (3.g., the information derivak
from en agent within the Special Drench of the Singapore Police) Qui-
weighn the rick (6.5., superating the local government and shaking
ite confidence both in our purpoese Rod in cur dansa), Clandestine
intolligence operations should Hainly be clanzod toth with the Dapper
mert of State and (cave for exceptiocal instances and cu agzoenment of
the Becretary of State) with the local U.S. Ambassador,
NW 65360 Docld:32281896 Page 2
F)
(1)(8)
4 Nov 93
7.
It has meant too that the State Depertment, cites appriced ef an
operation only in ita latar stagen, is under grant pressure to
endorse the operation be already mounted because of the alleged
evil consequences of exercistus a vete. I wall remember Tom
Mann's somerk the day the decision was made to go ahead on Cuba:
"I would never have favored initiating this operation, but, since it
kna gone as far as it bas, I do not think we can rich cailing it off. "
Moreover, or a tiras when there is increasing promium en activism,
Stats, when it questions CIA oparations or initiatives, casts thoaif in
a prissy, sisey, negativo rede.
The advocate of clandestine activities
seems 'tough' and realistic) the appensat heo te tavoka rath istangibles
ca she reputation of the United States, warld public opinion, "What
do we say in the United Nations?", etc., and carme hopelessly
idealistis, legalistic and 'sát'
The result of CIA's initiative in covert political oporations bas boun
to cranto situations which have forced policy on the State Department.
This was not the original idea behind CIA. As Allen Dallas WTCCS
in hie 1947 memorandum to the Senate Arund Services Committee,
"The Central Intelligence Agency should have anthing to do with policy."
Yot, in the years since, CIM has, in effect, 'made' peltoy in many
parte of the world. A number of governments still in power know
that they have even been targets of CIA attempts at Gwerthrow -- not
a state of mind calculated to stimulata friendly feelings toward the
United States. Indonesia, of course, is a prime example.
This experience suggests that the present systern by which CLA notifies
State of a projected covert operation is inadequate to protect US
bntoroute, There must be some means by which Skote cha be informed
ef such operations at an carly enough stage to affect the conception
and preliminary planning of the operation, Cherwise CLA will con
tinue to confront State with propositions having petencial impact on
foreign policy but at the late a point to subject that impact to reason-
able control.
The Controlled American Source (CAS) repreesnio a particula
agpact of Cines encroachmasd on poitey-making fanctions.
JFK Act 5 (g) (2) (D)
NW 65360 Docld:32281896 Page 3
Sec 3
DEPARTMENT OF
Retain class'n Change/classify to
With concurrence of
Peclassify In part and excise as shown
JEKAT E12356 12
FPC/HDR by
AK P16193
:
( (8)
4 NOV 23
(1) (8)
(1) (c)
4 NOV 93
JFK Act 5 (g) (2) (D)
NW 65360 Docld:32281896 Page 4
DEPARTMENT OF STATO
Delete Sex 3 Retain elass'n Change/classify f
JPICжет
With concurrence of
Declassify In part and excise- as shown
FPC/HDR by
C
057 7216-193
8.
(198)
4 NOV 23
:
SECRE
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
Elite Secs Retain class'n Change/classify to
With eoncurrence of
JFACT Declassify In part and excise as shown
E0 12356, Sec.
Sec. 1
JFK Act 5 (g) (2) (D)
4. Faramilitary warfare, I gather, is regarded in some quartora
za a purely technical matter, easily detachabis from policy and there-
fore a proper function of the Department of Dafanas. Yet there is
almost no CIA function mers peculiarly dependant in the political
context then pasamilitary warfare.
ט.л.
There are several rotzono far this. For can thing, a paramilitary
operation la in its nature a large and attributable operettan and shoreby,
no suggested abora, clashes with the presuppositions of our epon
society. (These coefideretiens need not appiy, hamoves, to tha
training of, cay, tive South Vietnamese in guarrilla tactics or to th
support of already existing guerrilla activitice. For another, 20
moral and political price of direct paremilitary failure is scuro for
Communists, when they stimulate paramilitary activity, are
dong what the world expects frear them; when we do it, we appear
to betray our own professed principles and therefore cannot afford to
compound delinquency by defeath Moreover, as the revent Algesien
opicoda chewed once we convince the world that we are committed to a
paramilitary endsever, we will be blamed fve all sorts of things.
as the recent tractors-for-prizoneza episode abad, when we do and
man to possible Coach, ma conzat lightly waits them off and claze tivo
booka. Tha Cemrnuntate, on the other how, have to scruples about
liquidating a lusing chars
And,
NW 65360 Docld:32281896 Page 5

